sacred (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from obsolete verb sacren to make holy (c.1200), from Old
French sacrer consecrate, anoint, dedicate (12c.) or directly from Latin sacrare to make sacred,
consecrate; hold sacred; immortalize; set apart, dedicate, from sacer (genitive sacri) sacred,
dedicated, holy, accursed, from Old Latin saceres, from PIE root *sak- to sanctify. Buck groups it
with Oscan sakrim, Umbrian sacra and calls it a distinctive Italic group, without any clear outside
connections. Related: Sacredness.    Nasalized form is sancire make sacred, confirm, ratify, ordain.
Sacred cow object of Hindu veneration, is from 1891; figurative sense of one who must not be
criticized is first recorded 1910, reflecting Western views of Hinduism. Sacred Heart the heart of
Jesus as an object of religious veneration is from 1765.


sacrilege (n.)

c.1300, crime of stealing what is consecrated to God, from Old French sacrilege (12c.), from Latin
sacrilegium temple robbery, a stealing of sacred things, from sacrilegus stealer of sacred things,
noun use of adjective, from phrase sacrum legere to steal sacred things, from sacrum sacred object
(from neuter singular of sacer sacred; see sacred) + legere take, pick up (see lecture (n.)). Second
element is not from religion. Transferred sense of profanation of anything held sacred is attested
from late 14c.


sacrosanct (adj.)

superlatively sacred or inviolable, c.1600, from Latin sacrosanctus protected by religious sanction,
consecrated with religious ceremonies, from sacro, ablative of sacrum religious sanction (from
neuter singular of sacer sacred) + sanctus, past participle of sancire make sacred (for both, see
sacred). Earlier in partially anglicized form sacro-seint (c.1500).


sacristy (n.)

repository for sacred things, mid-15c., from Anglo-French sacrestie, from Medieval Latin sacrista,
from Latin sacer sacred (see sacred).


hierophant (n.)

expounder of sacred mysteries, 1670s, from Late Latin hierophantes, from Greek hierophantes one who
teaches the rites of sacrifice and worship, literally one who shows sacred things, from hieros
sacred (see ire) + phainein to reveal, bring to light (see phantasm). In modern use, expounder of
esoteric doctrines, from 1822.


taboo (adj.)

also tabu, 1777 (in Cook's A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean), consecrated, inviolable, forbidden,
unclean or cursed, explained in some English sources as being from Tongan (Polynesian language of
the island of Tonga) ta-bu sacred, from ta mark + bu especially. But this may be folk etymology, as
linguists in the Pacific have reconstructed an irreducable Proto-Polynesian *tapu, from Proto-
Oceanic *tabu sacred, forbidden (compare Hawaiian kapu taboo, prohibition, sacred, holy,
consecrated; Tahitian tapu restriction, sacred; Maori tapu be under ritual restriction, prohibited).
The noun and verb are English innovations first recorded in Cook's book.


Avestan

Eastern Iranian language that survived in sacred texts centuries after it went extinct, from Persian
Avesta sacred books of the Parsees, earlier Avistak, literally books.


sacrifice (n.)

late 13c., offering of something (especially a life) to a deity as an act of propitiation or homage;
mid-14c., that which is offered in sacrifice, from Old French sacrifise sacrifice, offering (12c.),
from Latin sacrificium, from sacrificus performing priestly functions or sacrifices, from sacra
sacred rites (properly neuter plural of sacer sacred; see sacred) + root of facere to do, perform
(see factitious).    Latin sacrificium is glossed in Old English by ansegdniss. Sense of act of
giving up one thing for another; something given up for the sake of another is first recorded 1590s.
Baseball sense first attested 1880.


sacrum (n.)

bone at the base of the spine, 1753, from Late Latin os sacrum sacred bone, from Latin os bone (see
osseous) + sacrum, neuter of sacer sacred (see sacred). Said to be so called because the bone was
the part of animals that was offered in sacrifices. Translation of Greek hieron osteon. Greek hieros
also can mean strong, and some sources suggest the Latin is a mistranslation of Galen, who was
calling it the strong bone.


hierarchy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French ierarchie, from Medieval Latin hierarchia ranked division of angels (in
the system of Dionysius the Areopagite), from Greek hierarkhia rule of a high priest, from
hierarkhes high priest, leader of sacred rites, from ta hiera the sacred rites (neuter plural of
hieros sacred; see ire) + arkhein to lead, rule (see archon). Sense of ranked organization of
persons or things first recorded 1610s, initially of clergy, sense probably influenced by higher.
Related: Hierarchal; hierarchical.


Mecca

Arabic Makkah, sacred city of Islam, birthplace of Muhammad, which every Muslim must visit at least
once. Origins have been proposed in Phoenician maqaq ruined or Arabic mahrab sanctuary. Figurative
sense of any place one holds supremely sacred (usually with lower-case m-) is in English from 1850.
Related: Meccan.


obsecration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin obsecrationem (nominative obsecratio) a beseeching, imploring, supplication,
entreaty, noun of action from past participle stem of obsecrare to beseech, entreat (on religious
grounds), from ob- (see ob-) + sacrare to make or declare sacred (see sacred).


sacristan (n.)

officer charged with looking after the buildings and property of a church or religious house, early
14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Medieval Latin sacristanus, from Latin sacrista, from sacer
(genitive sacri) sacred (see sacred). Compare sexton, which is a doublet.


execration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin execrationem (nominative execratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of execrari to hate, curse, from ex- out (see ex-) + sacrare to devote to holiness or to
destruction, consecrate, from sacer sacred (see sacred).


hieratic (adj.)

pertaining to sacred things, 1650s (implied in hieratical), from Latin hieraticus, from Greek
hieratikos pertaining to a priest or his office, priestly, from hierateia priesthood, from hiereus
priest, from hieros sacred, holy, hallowed; superhuman, mighty; divine (see ire).


sacral (adj.)

1767, in anatomy, of or pertaining to the sacrum, from Modern Latin sacralis. In anthropology,
pertaining to religious rites, 1882, from Latin sacrum sacred thing, rite (see sacred). Related:
sacralization.


Veda (n.)

ancient sacred Hindu book, 1734, from Sanskrit veda, literally knowledge, understanding, especially
sacred knowledge, from root vid- to know, from PIE root *weid- to see (related to wit, and to
Avestan vaeda I know, Latin videre to see; see vision (n.)). The books are the Rig-, Yajur-, Sama-,
and Atharva-veda.


sanctuary (n.)

early 14c., building set apart for holy worship, from Anglo-French sentuarie, Old French saintuaire
sacred relic, holy thing; reliquary, sanctuary, from Late Latin sanctuarium a sacred place, shrine
(especially the Hebrew Holy of Holies; see sanctum), also a private room, from Latin sanctus holy
(see saint (n.)).    Since the time of Constantine and by medieval Church law, fugitives or debtors
enjoyed immunity from arrest in certain churches, hence transferred sense of immunity from
punishment (late 14c.). Exceptions were made in England in cases of treason and sacrilege. General
(non-ecclesiastical) sense of place of refuge or protection is attested from 1560s; as land set
aside for wild plants or animals to breed and live it is recorded from 1879.


Gradus ad Parnassum

Latin, literally A Step to Parnassus, mountain sacred to Apollo and the Muses, title of a dictionary
of prosody used in English public schools for centuries as a guide to Roman poetry. The book dates
from the 1680s.


white elephant (n.)

inconvenient thing that can't be got rid of, 1851, supposedly from the practice of the King of Siam
of presenting one of the sacred albino elephants to a courtier who had fallen from favor; the gift
was a great honor, but the proper upkeep of one was ruinously expensive.


Chartres

cathedral city in central France, said to be named for the Carnutes, Gaulish people who had a sacred
place there, whose name is said to be from a root meaning rock, stone, but there is a famous Druid
Stone at the church.


Waterloo (n.)

village near Brussels; the great battle there took place June 18, 1815; extended sense of a final,
crushing defeat is first attested 1816 in letter of Lord Byron. The second element in the place name
is from Flemish loo sacred wood.


hierarch (n.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin hierarcha, from Greek hierarkhes leader of sacred rites, high priest (see
hierarchy).


persea (n.)

sacred fruit-bearing tree of Egypt and Persia, c.1600, from Latin persea, from Greek persea. Used
from early 19c. of a genus of trees and shrubs in the West Indies.


Tenochtitlan

former Aztec city, Nahuatl (Aztecan), literally place of the nopal rock, from tetl rock + nuchtli
nopal, a species of cactus sacred to the sun god.


S.T.D.

1975 as an abbreviation of sexually transmitted disease. Earlier it was an abbreviation of Latin
Sacrosanctae Theologiae Doctor Doctor of Sacred Theology.


motet (n.)

choral composition on a sacred text, late 14c., from Old French motet (13c.), diminutive of mot word
(see mot).


mullah (n.)

title given in Muslim lands to one learned in theology and sacred law, 1610s, from Turkish molla,
Persian and Urdu mulla, from Arabic mawla master, from waliya reigned, governed.


ibis (n.)

stork-like bird, late 14c., from Greek ibis, from Egyptian hab, a sacred bird of Egypt.


Thammuz (n.)

1530s, from Hebrew tammuz, tenth month of the Jewish civil year, fourth of the sacred, covering
parts of June and July; also the name of a Syrian deity equivalent to Phoenician Adon, whose
festival began with the new moon of this month (compare Tammuz).


June

c.1100, from Latin Iunius (mensis), probably a variant of Iunonius, sacred to Juno (see Juno).
Replaced Old English li&eth;e se &aelig;rra earlier mildness.


sanction (n.)

early 15c., confirmation or enactment of a law, from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) act of
decreeing or ordaining, also decree, ordinance, noun of action from past participle stem of sancire
to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecclesiastical
decrees.


Hippocrene

fount on Mount Helicon, sacred to the Muses, from Greek Hippokrene, literally horse's fountain, from
hippos horse + krene fountain.


mantra (n.)

1808, that part of the Vedas which contains hymns, from Sanskrit mantra-s sacred message or text,
charm, spell, counsel, literally instrument of thought, related to manyate thinks, from PIE root
*men- to think (see mind (n.)). Sense of special word used for meditation is first recorded in
English 1956.


Helicon

1520s, from Greek Helikon, mountain in Boeotia, sacred to the Muses, in which arose the fountains of
Aganippe and Hippocrene. Literally the tortuous mountain, from helix (genitive helikos) spiral (see
helix).


palladium (n.1)

safeguard, c.1600, originally (late 14c.) sacred image of Pallas Athene, from Latin palladium, from
Greek Palladion, noun use of neuter of Palladios of Pallas. It stood in the citadel of Troy and the
safety of the city was believed to depend on it.


Zend (n.)

1715, Parsee sacred book (in full, Zend-Avesta, 1620s), from Old Persian zend, from Pahlavi zand
commentary. First used 1771 in reference to the language of the Zend-Avesta by French scholar
Abraham Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron (1731-1805).


simony (n.)

c.1200, the sin of buying or selling sacred things, from Old French simonie selling of church
offices (12c.), from Late Latin simonia, from Simon Magus, the Samaritan magician who was rebuked by
Peter when he tried to buy the power of conferring the Holy Spirit (Acts viii:18-20). Related:
Simoniac; simoniacal.


Geronimo

cry made in jumping, apparently from the story of the Apache leader Geronimo making a daring leap to
escape U.S. cavalry pursuers at Medicine Bluffs, Oklahoma (and supposedly shouting his name in
defiance as he did). Adopted as battle cry by 82nd Airborne U.S. paratroopers in World War II, who
perhaps had seen it in the 1939 Paramount Studios movie Geronimo. The name is the Italian and
Spanish form of Jerome, from Greek Hieronomos, literally sacred name.


verbena (n.)

genus of plants, the vervain, 1560s, from Latin verbena leaves or twigs of olive, myrtle, laurel, or
other sacred plants employed in religious ceremonies, from PIE *werbh- (cognates: Lithuanian virbas
twig, branch, scion, rod), from root *werb- to turn, bend (see warp (v.)).


oriflamme (n.)

sacred banner of St. Denis, late 15c., from Old French orie flambe, from Latin aurea flamma golden
flame. The ancient battle standard of the kings of France, it was of red or orange-red silk, with
two or three points, and was given to the kings by the abbot of St. Denis on setting out to war.
Cotgrave says it was borne at first onely in warres made against Infidells; but afterwards vsed in
all other warres; and at length vtterly lost in a battell against the Flemings. It is last mentioned
in an abbey inventory of 1534.


Martian (adj.)

late 14c., marcien of the planet Mars (originally in reference to astrological influence), from
Latin Martius sacred to Mars; pertaining to the planet Mars, from Mars (genitive Martis). The noun
meaning an inhabitant of the planet Mars is attested from 1883.


Pali

1690s, Middle High Indian dialect used in sacred Buddhist writings (the lingua franca of northern
India from c. 6c. B.C.E.-2c. B.C.E.), from Sanskrit Pali, from pali bhasa language of the canonical
books, from pali line, role, canon + bhasa language.


consecrate (v.)

late 14c., from Latin consecratus, past participle of consecrare to make holy, devote, from com-
together (see com-) + sacrare (see sacred). Related: Consecrated; consecrating.


sexton (n.)

c.1300, sekesteyn, person in charge of the sacred objects of a church, from Old French segrestien,
from Medieval Latin sacristanus (see sacristan). Sense of custodian of a church first recorded
1580s. Fem. forms sextress, sextrice are recorded 15c., but the usual form is sextoness (early
15c.).


ceremony (n.)

late 14c., cerymonye, from Old French ceremonie and directly from Medieval Latin ceremonia, from
Latin caerimonia holiness, sacredness; awe; reverent rite, sacred ceremony, an obscure word,
possibly of Etruscan origin, or a reference to the ancient rites performed by the Etruscan pontiffs
at Caere, near Rome. Introduced in English by Wyclif.


Elizabeth

fem. proper name, Biblical name of the wife of Aaron, from Late Latin Elisabeth, from Greek
Eleisabeth, Eleisabet, from Hebrew Elishebha God is an oath, the second element said by Klein to be
related to shivah (fem. sheva) seven, and to nishba he swore, originally he bound himself by (the
sacred number) seven. Has never ranked lower than 26th in popularity among the names given to baby
girls in the U.S. in any year since 1880, the oldest for which a reliable list is available.


hieroglyphic

1580s (adj. and n.), from Late Latin hieroglyphicus, from Greek hieroglyphikos hieroglyphic; of
Egyptian writing, from hieros sacred (see ire) + glyphe carving, from glyphein to carve (see glyph).
Plutarch began the custom of using the adjective (ta hieroglyphika) as a noun.


scripture (n.)

early 14c., the sacred writings of the Bible; mid-14c., a writing, an act of writing, written
characters, from Late Latin scriptura the writings contained in the Bible, a passage from the Bible,
in classical Latin a writing, character, inscription, from scriptus, past participle of scribere
write (see script (n.)).


sacerdotal (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French sacerdotal and directly from Latin sacerdotalis of or pertaining to a
priest, from sacerdos (genitive sacerdotis) priest, literally offerer of sacrifices, from sacer holy
(see sacred) + stem of dare to give (see date (n.1)).


