saga (n.)

1709, an antiquarians' revival to describe the medieval prose narratives of Iceland and Norway, from
Old Norse saga saga, story, cognate with Old English sagu a saying (see saw (n.2)). Properly, a
narrative composition of Iceland or Norway in the Middle Ages, or one that has their
characteristics. Meaning long, convoluted story is from 1857.


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


valerian (n.)

plant of Eurasia, cultivated for its medicinal root, late 14c., from Old French valeriane wild
valerian (13c.), apparently from feminine singular of Latin adjective Valerianus, from the personal
name Valerius (see Valerie); but Weekley writes, some of the German and Scand. forms of the name
point rather to connection with the saga-hero Wieland.


saw (n.1)

toothed cutting tool, Old English sagu, from Proto-Germanic *sago a cutting tool (cognates: Old
English seax knife, Old Norse s&#246;g, Norwegian sag, Danish sav, Swedish s&#229;g, Middle Dutch
saghe, Dutch zaag, Old High German saga, German S&auml;ge saw), from PIE root *sek- to cut
(cognates: Latin secare to cut, Russian sech' to cut; see section (n.)).


berserk (adj.)

1844, from berserk (n.) Norse warrior, by 1835, an alternative form of berserker (1822), a word
which was introduced by Sir Walter Scott, from Old Norse berserkr (n.) raging warrior of superhuman
strength; probably from *ber- bear + serkr shirt, thus literally a warrior clothed in bearskin. Thus
not from Old Norse berr bare, naked.    Thorkelin, in the essay on the Berserkir, appended to his
edition of the Krisini Saga, tells that an old name of the Berserk frenzy was hamremmi, i.e.,
strength acquired from another strange body, because it was anciently believed that the persons who
were liable to this frenzy were mysteriously endowed, during its accesses, with a strange body of
unearthly strength. If, however, the Berserk was called on by his own name, he lost his mysterious
form, and his ordinary strength alone remained. [Notes and Queries, Dec. 28, 1850]     The
adjectival use probably is from such phrases as berserk frenzy, or as a title (Arngrim the Berserk).


barrow (n.2)

mound, Old English beorg (West Saxon), berg (Anglian) barrow, mountain, hill, mound, from Proto-
Germanic *bergaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German berg mountain, Old North bjarg
rock), from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated (cognates: Old Church Slavonic bregu mountain,
height, Old Irish brigh mountain, Welsh bera stack, pyramid, Sanskrit b'rhant high, Avestan brzant-
high, Old Persian bard- be high, Greek Pergamos, name of the citadel of Troy). Obsolete except in
place-names and southwest England dialect by 1400; revived by modern archaeology.    In place-names
used of small continuously curving hills, smaller than a dun, with the summit typically occupied by
a single farmstead or by a village church with the village beside the hill, and also of burial
mounds. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]  Meaning mound erected over a grave was a
specific sense in late Old English. Barrow-wight first recorded 1869 in Eirikr Magnusson and William
Morris's translation of the Icelandic saga of Grettir the Strong.


