sagacious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin sagacem (nominative sagax) of quick perception; see sagacity. Related:
Sagaciously.


hearty (adj.)

late 14c., courageous; spirited, zealous; also loyal, faithful; sagacious, wise, from heart + -y
(2). Related: Heartiness.


witty (adj.)

Old English wittig clever, wise, sagacious; in one's right mind; see wit (n.) intellect + -y (2).
Meaning possessing sparkling wit is recorded from 1580s. Related: Wittily; wittiness.


astute (adj.)

1610s, from Latin astutus crafty, wary, shrewd; sagacious, expert, from astus cunning, cleverness,
adroitness, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Greek asty town, a word borrowed into Latin and with
an overtone of city sophistication (compare asteism). Related: Astutely; astuteness.


Ladino (n.)

1889, Spanish mixed with Hebrew, Arabic, and other elements, written in Hebrew characters, spoken by
Sephardim in Turkey, Greece, etc. From Spanish Ladino sagacious, cunning crafty, originally knowing
Latin, Latin, from Latin Latinus. The Spanish word also has appeared in 19c. American English in its
senses vicious horse and, in Central America, mestizo, white person.


prudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French prudent with knowledge, deliberate (c.1300), from Latin prudentem
(nominative prudens) knowing, skilled, sagacious, circumspect; rarely in literal sense foreseeing;
contraction of providens, present participle of providere to foresee (see provide). Related:
Prudently.


red herring (n.)

smoked herring early 15c. (they turn red when cured), as opposed to white herring fresh herring.
Supposedly used by fugitives to put bloodhounds off their scent (1680s), hence metaphoric sense
(1864) of something used to divert attention from the basic issue; earlier simply a false lead:
Though I have not the honour of being one of those sagacious country gentlemen, who have so long
vociferated for the American war, who have so long run on the red-herring scent of American taxation
before they found out there was no game on foot; (etc.) [Parliamentary speech dated March 20, 1782,
reprinted in Beauties of the British Senate, London, 1786]


presage (n.)

late 14c., something that portends, from Latin praesagium a foreboding, from praesagire to perceive
beforehand, forebode, from praesagus (adj.) perceiving beforehand, prophetic, from prae before (see
pre-) + sagus prophetic, related to sagire perceive (see sagacious).


wise (adj.)

Old English wis learned, sagacious, cunning; sane; prudent, discreet; experienced; having the power
of discerning and judging rightly, from Proto-Germanic *wissaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
wis, Old Norse viss, Dutch wijs, German weise wise), from past participle adjective *wittos of PIE
root *weid- to see, hence to know (see vision). Modern slang meaning aware, cunning first attested
1896. Related to the source of Old English witan to know, wit.  A wise man has no extensive
knowledge; He who has extensive knowledge is not a wise man. [Lao-tzu, Tao te Ching, c.550 B.C.E.]
Wise man was in Old English. Wise guy is attested from 1896, American English; wise-ass (n.) by
1966, American English (probably a literal sense is intended by the phrase in the 1607 comedy
Westward Hoe by Dekker and Webster). Wisenheimer, with mock German or Yiddish surname suffix, first
recorded 1904.


