sage (n.2)

man of profound wisdom, mid-14c., from sage (adj.). Originally applied to the Seven Sages -- Thales,
Solon, Periander, Cleobulus, Chilon, Bias, and Pittacus.


sagebrush (n.)

1850, from sage (n.1), to which it has no biological affinity, + brush (n.2). Said to be so called
for resemblance of its appearance or odor.    Sage-brush is very fair fuel, but as a vegetable it is
a distinguished failure. Nothing can abide the taste of it but the jackass and his illegitimate
child, the mule. [Mark Twain, Roughing It]


sage (adj.)

wise, c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sage wise, knowledgeable, learned; shrewd,
skillful (11c.), from Gallo-Roman *sabius, from Vulgar Latin *sapius, from Latin sapere have a
taste, have good taste, be wise, from PIE root *sap- to taste (see sap (n.1)). Meaning characterized
by wisdom is from 1530s. Related: Sageness.


sage (n.1)

kind of herb (Salvia officinalis), early 14c., from Old French sauge (13c.), from Latin salvia, from
salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). So called for its healing or preserving qualities (it was used to
keep teeth clean and relieve sore gums, and boiled in water to make a drink to alleviate arthritis).
In English folklore, sage, like parsley, is said to grow best where the wife is dominant. In late
Old English as salvie, directly from Latin. Compare German Salbei, also from Latin.


sagely (adv.)

c.1400, from sage (adj.) + -ly (2).


salvia (n.)

1844, from Latin salvia the plant sage (see sage (n.1)).


maharishi (n.)

Hindu sage or holy man, 1785, from Sanskrit, from maha great, from PIE root *meg- great (see
magnate) + rishi inspired sage. In general use, a title for a popular spiritual leader.


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


philosopher (n.)

from Old English philosophe, from Latin philosophus philosopher, from Greek philosophos philosopher,
sage, one who speculates on the nature of things and truth, literally lover of wisdom, from philos
loving (see -phile) + sophos wise, a sage (see sophist). Modern form with -r appears early 14c.,
from an Anglo-French or Old French variant of philosophe, with an agent-noun ending.  Pythagoras was
the first who called himself philosophos, instead of sophos, 'wise man,' since this latter term was
suggestive of immodesty. [Klein] Philosophy also was used of alchemy in Middle Ages, hence
Philosophers' stone (late 14c., translating Medieval Latin lapis philosophorum, early 12c.), a
reputed solid substance supposed by alchemists to change baser metals into gold or silver; also
identified with the elixir and thus given the attribute of prolonging life indefinitely and curing
wounds and disease. (French pierre philosophale, German der Stein der Weisen).


Kashmir

from Sanskrit Kashypamara land of Kashyap, said to be the name of a renowned sage. Related:
Kashmiri.


Buddha (n.)

1680s, from Pali, literally awakened, enlightened, past participle of budh to awake, know, perceive,
related to Sanskrit bodhati is awake, observes, understands (see bid). Title given by his adherents
to the man who taught this path, Siddhartha Gautama, also known to them as Sakyamuni Sage of the
Sakyas (his family clan), who lived in northern India 5c. B.C.E.


presage (v.)

1560s, from Middle French pr&eacute;sager (16c.), from pr&eacute;sage omen, from Latin praesagium
(see presage (n.)). Related: Presaged; presaging.


physician (n.)

early 13c., fisicien a healer, a medical practitioner, from Old French fisiciien physician, doctor,
sage (12c., Modern French physicien means physicist), from fisique art of healing, from Latin
physica natural science (see physic). Distinguished from surgeon from c.1400. The ph- spelling
attested from late 14c. (see ph).


wizard (n.)

early 15c., philosopher, sage, from Middle English wys wise (see wise (adj.)) + -ard. Compare
Lithuanian zynyste magic, zynys sorcerer, zyne witch, all from zinoti to know. The ground sense is
perhaps to know the future. The meaning one with magical power, one proficient in the occult
sciences did not emerge distinctly until c.1550, the distinction between philosophy and magic being
blurred in the Middle Ages. As a slang word meaning excellent it is recorded from 1922.


mathematic (n.)

late 14c. as singular noun, replaced by early 17c. by mathematics, from Latin mathematica (plural),
from Greek mathematike tekhne mathematical science, feminine singular of mathematikos (adj.)
relating to mathematics, scientific, astronomical; disposed to learn, from mathema (genitive
mathematos) science, knowledge, mathematical knowledge; a lesson, literally that which is learnt;
related to manthanein to learn, from PIE root *mendh- to learn (cognates: Greek menthere to care,
Lithuanian mandras wide-awake, Old Church Slavonic madru wise, sage, Gothic mundonsis to look at,
German munter awake, lively). As an adjective, 1540s, from French math&#233;matique or directly from
Latin mathematicus.


caveat (n.)

1540s, from Latin, literally let him beware, 3rd person singular present subjunctive of cavere to
beware, take heed, watch, guard against, from PIE root *skeue- to pay attention, perceive (cognates:
Sanskrit kavih wise, sage, seer, poet; Lithuanian kavoti tend, safeguard; Armenian cucanem I show;
Latin cautio wariness; Greek koein to mark, perceive, hear, kydos glory, fame, literally that which
is heard of; Old Church Slavonic chujo to feel, perceive, hear, cudo wonder, literally that which is
heard of; Czech (z)koumati to perceive, be aware of; Serbian chuvati watch, heed; Old English
sceawian to look at (source of show (v.)); Middle Dutch schoon beautiful, bright, properly showy;
Gothic hausjan hear).


mind (n.)

late 12c., from Old English gemynd memory, remembrance, state of being remembered; thought, purpose;
conscious mind, intellect, intention, Proto-Germanic *ga-mundiz (cognates: Gothic muns thought,
munan to think; Old Norse minni mind; German Minne (archaic) love, originally memory, loving
memory), from PIE root *men- think, remember, have one's mind aroused, with derivatives referring to
qualities of mind or states of thought (cognates: Sanskrit matih thought, munih sage, seer; Greek
memona I yearn, mania madness, mantis one who divines, prophet, seer; Latin mens mind,
understanding, reason, memini I remember, mentio remembrance; Lithuanian mintis thought, idea, Old
Church Slavonic mineti to believe, think, Russian pamjat memory).    Meaning mental faculty is mid-
14c. Memory, one of the oldest senses, now is almost obsolete except in old expressions such as bear
in mind, call to mind. Mind's eye remembrance is early 15c. Phrase time out of mind is attested from
early 15c. To pay no mind disregard is recorded from 1916, American English dialect. To have half a
mind to to have one's mind half made up to (do something) is recorded from 1726. Mind-reading is
from 1882.


