salient (n.)

1828, from salient (adj.).


salient (adj.)

1560s, leaping, a heraldic term, from Latin salientem (nominative saliens), present participle of
salire to leap, from PIE root *sel- (4) to jump (cognates: Greek hallesthai to leap, Middle Irish
saltraim I trample, and probably Sanskrit ucchalati rises quickly).    It was used in Middle English
as an adjective meaning leaping, skipping. The meaning pointing outward (preserved in military
usage) is from 1680s; that of prominent, striking first recorded 1840, from salient point (1670s),
which refers to the heart of an embryo, which seems to leap, and translates Latin punctum saliens,
going back to Aristotle's writings. Hence, the starting point of anything.


saliency (n.)

1660s, leaping, jumping; see salient (adj.) + -cy. From 1834 as salience.


salience (n.)

1836, quality of leaping; see salient (adj.) + -ence. Meaning quality of standing out is from 1849.


saltation (n.)

a leap, a bound, 1620s, from Latin saltationem (nominative saltatio) a dancing; dance, noun of
action from past participle stem of saltare to hop, dance, frequentative of salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)).


consilience (n.)

1840, concurrence, coincidence, literally a jumping together, formed on model of resilience from
Latin consilient-, from com- together (see com-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).


saute (n.)

1813, from French saut&eacute;, literally jumped, bounced (in reference to tossing continually while
cooking), past participle of sauter to jump, from Latin saltare to hop, dance, frequentative of
salire to leap (see salient (adj.)). As an adjective, fried quickly, from 1869. As a verb from 1859.
Related: Sauteed.


resilience (n.)

1620s, act of rebounding, from Latin resiliens, present participle of resilire to rebound, recoil,
from re- back (see re-) + salire to jump, leap (see salient (adj.)). Compare result (v.). Meaning
elasticity is from 1824.


sault (n.)

waterfall or rapid, c.1600, from colonial French sault, 17c. alternative spelling of saut to leap,
from Latin saltus, from salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).


salacious (adj.)

1660s, from Latin salax (genitive salacis) lustful, probably originally fond of leaping, as in a
male animal leaping on a female in sexual advances, from salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).
Earliest form of the word in English is salacity (c.1600). Related: Salaciously; salaciousness.


sally (n.)

1540s, a sudden rush, dash, or springing forth; specifically of troops from a besieged place,
attacking the besiegers, from Middle French saillie a rushing forth, noun use of fem. past
participle of saillir to leap, from Latin salire to leap (see salient (adj.)). Sally-port gate or
passage in a fortification to afford free egress to troops in making a sally is from 1640s.


desultory (adj.)

1580s, skipping about, from Latin desultorius hasty, casual, superficial, adjective form of desultor
(n.) a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop, from
desul-, stem of desilire jump down, from de- down (see de-) + salire to jump, leap (see salient
(adj.)). Sense of irregular, without aim or method is c.1740. Related: Desultorily; desultoriness.


saltire (n.)

c.1400, an ordinary that resembles a St. Andrew's Cross on a shield or flag, consisting of a bend
dexter and a bend sinister crossing each other, from Middle French saultoir, literally stirrup, from
Medieval Latin saltatorium, properly neuter of Latin saltatorius pertaining to leaping, from salire
to leap (see salient (adj.)). The connection between a stirrup and the diagonal cross is perhaps the
two deltoid shapes that comprise the cross.


somersault (n.)

1520s, from Middle French sombresault, from Old Proven&ccedil;al sobresaut, from sobre over (from
Latin supra over; see supra-) + saut a jump, from Latin saltus, from the root of salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)). Sometimes further corrupted to somerset, etc.


exult (v.)

1560s, to leap up; 1590s, to rejoice, triumph, from Middle French exulter, from Latin
exultare/exsultare leap about, leap for joy, frequentative of exsilire to leap up, from ex- out (see
ex-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)). The notion is of leaping or dancing for joy. Related:
Exulted; exulting.


D-day (n.)

1918, date set for the beginning of a military operation, with D as an abbreviation of day; compare
H-hour, also from the same military order of Sept. 7, 1918:The First Army will attack at H-Hour on
D-Day with the object of forcing the evacuation of the St. Mihiel salient. [Field Order No. 8, First
Army, A.E.F.]They designate the day and hour of the operation when the day and hour have not yet
been determined, or where secrecy is essential [U.S. Army Center of Military History Web site]. Now
almost exclusively of June 6, 1944.


salmon (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French samoun, Old French salmun (Modern French saumon), from Latin salmonem
(nominative salmo) a salmon, probably originally leaper, from salire to leap (see salient (adj.)),
though some dismiss this as folk etymology. Another theory traces it to Celtic. Replaced Old English
l&aelig;x, from PIE *lax, the more usual word for the fish (see lox). In reference to a color, from
1786.


insult (v.)

1560s, triumph over in an arrogant way, from Middle French insulter (14c.) and directly from Latin
insultare to assail, to leap upon (already used by Cicero in sense of insult, scoff at, revile),
frequentative of insilire leap at or upon, from in- on, at (see in- (2)) + salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)). Sense of to verbally abuse, affront, assail with disrespect is from 1610s. Related:
Insulted; insulting.


assail (v.)

c.1200, from Old French assalir attack, assault, assail (12c., Modern French assaillir), from Vulgar
Latin *adsalire to leap at, from Latin ad- at (see ad-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).
Figurative use from mid-14c. Related: Assailed; assailing; assailable.


horn (n.)

Old English horn horn of an animal, also wind instrument (originally made from animal horns), from
Proto-Germanic *hurnaz (cognates: German Horn, Dutch horen, Gothic haurn), from PIE *ker- (1) horn;
head, uppermost part of the body, with derivatives refering to horned animals, horn-shaped objects
and projecting parts (cognates: Greek karnon horn, Latin cornu horn, Sanskrit srngam horn, Persian
sar head, Avestan sarah- head, Greek koryphe head, Latin cervus deer, Welsh carw deer). Reference to
car horns is first recorded 1901. Figurative senses of Latin cornu included salient point, chief
argument; wing, flank; power, courage, strength. Jazz slang sense of trumpet is by 1921. Meaning
telephone is by 1945.


dance (v.)

c.1300, from Old French dancier (12c., Modern French danser), of unknown origin, perhaps from Low
Frankish *dintjan and akin to Old Frisian dintje tremble, quiver. A word of uncertain origin but
which, through French influence in arts and society, has become the primary word for this activity
from Spain to Russia (Italian danzare, Spanish danzar, Rumanian dansa, Swedish dansa, German
tanzen).    In part the loanword from French is used mainly with reference to fashionable dancing
while the older native word persists in use with reference to folk-dancing, as definitively Russ.
pljasat' vs. tancovat' [Buck].    Replaced Old English sealtian, itself a borrowing from Latin
saltare to dance, frequentative of salire to leap (see salient (adj.); dance words frequently are
derived from words meaning jump, leap). Related: Danced; dancing.    It is strange, and will, I am
sure, appear to my readers almost incredible, that as far as I have ever read, there is no reference
that can be identified as containing a clear allusion to dancing in any of our really ancient MS.
books. [Eugene O'Curry, On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish, vol. 2, p.406, 1873]


