salutary (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French salutaire beneficial, or directly from Latin salutaris healthful, from
salus (genitive salutis) good health (see salute).


treadmill (n.)

invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill
(n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s.    As a corrective
punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the prisoners,
and is not likely to be easily forgotten, while it is an occupation which by no means interferes
with, nor is calculated to lessen the value of, those branches of prison regulation which provide
for the moral and religious improvement of the criminal. [Description of the Tread Mill Invented by
Mr. William Cubitt of Ipswich for the Employment of Prisoners, London, 1822]    By later generations
regarded as a path to physical fitness.


rebel (n.)

person who makes war on his country for political motives, mid-14c., from rebel (adj.). Meaning
supporter of the American cause in the War of Independence is from 1775; sense of supporter of the
Southern cause in the American Civil War is attested from April 15, 1861. Rebel yell in an American
Civil War context attested from 1862, but the thing itself is older and was said to have been picked
up by southwestern men in their periodic wars against the Indians.  The Southern troops, when
charging or to express their delight, always yell in a manner peculiar to themselves. The Yankee
cheer is more like ours; but the Confederate officers declare that the rebel yell has a particular
merit, and always produces a salutary and useful effect upon their adversaries. A corps is sometimes
spoken of as a 'good yelling regiment.' [A.J.L. Fremantle, The Battle of Gettysburg and the Campaign
in Pennsylvania, in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Sept. 1863]


perspire (v.)

1640s, to evaporate through the pores, a back-formation from perspiration and in part from Latin
perspirare to breathe, to blow constantly (see perspiration). Meaning to sweat is a polite usage
attested from 1725. Medical men tried to maintain a distinction between sensible (sweat) and
insensible perspiration:  [I]t is sufficient for common use to observe, that perspiration is that
insensible discharge of vapour from the whole surface of the body and the lungs which is constantly
going on in a healthy state; that it is always natural and always salutary; that sweat, on the
contrary, is an evacuation, which never appears without some uncommon effort, or some disease to the
system, that it weakens and relaxes, and is so far from coinciding with perspiration, that it
obstructs and checks it. [Charles White, A Treatise on the Management of Pregnant and Lying-in
Women, London, 1791]  Related: Perspired; perspiring.


