sanction (v.)

1778, confirm by sanction, make valid or binding; 1797 as to permit authoritatively; from sanction
(n.). Seemingly contradictory meaning impose a penalty on is from 1956 but is rooted in an old
legalistic sense of the noun. Related: Sanctioned; sanctioning.


sanctions (n.)

in international diplomacy, 1919, plural of sanction (n.) in the sense of part or clause of a law
which spells out the penalty for breaking it (1650s).


sanction (n.)

early 15c., confirmation or enactment of a law, from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) act of
decreeing or ordaining, also decree, ordinance, noun of action from past participle stem of sancire
to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecclesiastical
decrees.


sacrosanct (adj.)

superlatively sacred or inviolable, c.1600, from Latin sacrosanctus protected by religious sanction,
consecrated with religious ceremonies, from sacro, ablative of sacrum religious sanction (from
neuter singular of sacer sacred) + sanctus, past participle of sancire make sacred (for both, see
sacred). Earlier in partially anglicized form sacro-seint (c.1500).


pocket (adj.)

1610s, of or pertaining to or meant for a pocket, from pocket (n.). Pocket-knife is first recorded
1727; pocket-money is attested from 1630s. Often merely implying a small-sized version of something
(for example of of warships, from 1930; also compare Pocket Venus beautiful, small woman, attested
from 1808). Pocket veto attested from 1842, American English.    The pocket veto can operate only in
the case of bills sent to the President within ten days of Congressional adjournment. If he retain
such a bill (figuratively, in his pocket) neither giving it his sanction by signing it, nor
withholding his sanction in returning it to Congress, the bill is defeated. The President is not
bound to give reasons for defeating a bill by a pocket veto which he has not had at least ten days
to consider. In a regular veto he is bound to give such reasons. [James Albert Woodburn, The
American Republic and its Government, Putnam's, 1903]


countenance (v.)

late 15c., to behave or act, from countenance (n.). Sense of to favor, patronize is from 1560s, from
notion of to look upon with sanction or smiles. Related: Countenanced; countenancing.


fiat (n.)

authoritative sanction, 1630s, from Latin fiat let it be done (also used in the opening of Medieval
Latin proclamations and commands), third person singular present subjunctive of fieri, used as
passive of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also sometimes a reference to fiat lux let there be
light in the Book of Genesis.


approve (v.)

c.1300, to demonstrate, prove; mid-14c., to attest (something) with authority, from Old French
aprover (Modern French approuver) approve, agree to, from Latin approbare to assent to as good,
regard as good, from ad- to (see ad-) + probare to try, test something (to find if it is good), from
probus honest, genuine (see prove).    The meaning extended late 14c. to to sanction, endorse,
confirm formally then to assent to (something) as good (early 15c.), especially in reference to the
actions of authorities, parliaments, etc. Related: Approved; approving.


sanctify (v.)

late 14c., seintefie to consecrate, from Old French saintefier sanctify (12c.,   Modern French
sanctifier), from Late Latin sanctificare to make holy, from sanctus holy (see saint (n.)) + root of
facere to make (see factitious). Form altered in English c.1400 to conform with Latin. Meaning to
render holy or legitimate by religious sanction is from c.1400; transferred sense of to render
worthy of respect is from c.1600. Related: Sanctified; sanctifying.


solemn (adj.)

mid-14c., performed with due religious ceremony or reverence, sacred, devoted to religious
observances, also, of a vow, etc., made under religious sanction, binding, from Old French solempne
(12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin sollemnis annual, established, religiously
fixed, formal, ceremonial, traditional, perhaps related to sollus whole (see safe (adj.)).    The
explanation that Latin sollemnis was formed from sollus whole + annus year is not considered valid
[Barnhart], but some assimilation via folk-etymology is possible. In Middle English also famous,
important; imposing, grand, hence Chaucer's friar, a ful solempne man. Meaning marked by seriousness
or earnestness is from late 14c.; sense of fitted to inspire devout reflection is from c.1400.
Related: Solemnly.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


