sanctuary (n.)

early 14c., building set apart for holy worship, from Anglo-French sentuarie, Old French saintuaire
sacred relic, holy thing; reliquary, sanctuary, from Late Latin sanctuarium a sacred place, shrine
(especially the Hebrew Holy of Holies; see sanctum), also a private room, from Latin sanctus holy
(see saint (n.)).    Since the time of Constantine and by medieval Church law, fugitives or debtors
enjoyed immunity from arrest in certain churches, hence transferred sense of immunity from
punishment (late 14c.). Exceptions were made in England in cases of treason and sacrilege. General
(non-ecclesiastical) sense of place of refuge or protection is attested from 1560s; as land set
aside for wild plants or animals to breed and live it is recorded from 1879.


chapel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French chapele (12c., Modern French chapelle), from Medieval Latin cappella
chapel, sanctuary for relics, literally little cape, diminutive of Late Latin cappa cape (see cap
(n.)); by tradition, originally in reference to the sanctuary in France in which the miraculous cape
of St. Martin of Tours, patron saint of France, was preserved; meaning extended in most European
languages to any sanctuary. (While serving Rome as a soldier deployed in Gaul, Martin cut his
military coat in half to share it with a ragged beggar. That night, Martin dreamed Christ wearing
the half-cloak; the half Martin kept was the relic.)


penates (n.)

Roman household gods, 1510s, from Latin penates gods of the inside of the house, related to penatus
sanctuary of a temple (especially that of Vesta), cognate with penitus within (see penetrate).


sentry (n.)

1610s, originally watchtower; perhaps a shortened variant of sentinel, which had a variant form
centrinel (1590s); or perhaps worn down from sanctuary, on notion of shelter for a watchman. Meaning
military guard posted around a camp is first attested 1630s. Sentry-box is from 1728.


Mecca

Arabic Makkah, sacred city of Islam, birthplace of Muhammad, which every Muslim must visit at least
once. Origins have been proposed in Phoenician maqaq ruined or Arabic mahrab sanctuary. Figurative
sense of any place one holds supremely sacred (usually with lower-case m-) is in English from 1850.
Related: Meccan.


denim (n.)

1690s, from French serge de N&icirc;mes serge from N&icirc;mes, town in southern France. Application
to coarse cotton cloth is first recorded 1850 in American English. Denims pants made of denim
recorded from 1868. The place name is Roman Nemausus, said to be ultimately from Gaulish nemo
sanctuary.


asylum (n.)

early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), from Latin asylum sanctuary, from Greek asylon refuge, noun
use of neuter of asylos inviolable, safe from violence, especially of persons seeking protection,
from a- without + syle right of seizure. So literally an inviolable place. General sense of safe or
secure place is from 1640s; meaning benevolent institution to shelter some class of persons is from
1776.


tabernacle (n.)

mid-13c., portable sanctuary carried by the Israelites in the wilderness, from Old French tabernacle
the Jewish Tabernacle; tent, canopy; tomb, monument (12c.), from Latin tabernaculum tent, especially
a tent of an augur (for taking observations), diminutive of taberna hut, cabin, booth (see tavern).
Use of the word in English transferred late 14c. to the Temple in Jerusalem (which continued its
function). Sense of house of worship first recorded 1690s. Also in Biblical language, the body as
the temporary abode of the soul (late 14c.). The Jewish Feast of Tabernacles (mid-October) was
observed as a thanksgiving for harvest. Related: Tabernacular.


edifice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French edifice building, from Latin aedificium building, from aedificare to
erect a building, from aedis, variant of aedes temple, sanctuary, usually a single edifice without
partitions, also, in the plural, dwelling house, building, originally a place with a hearth + the
root of facere to make (see factitious).   &AElig;dis is from PIE *aidh- to burn (cognates: Greek
aithein to burn, Sanskrit inddhe burst into flames, Old Irish aed fire, Welsh aidd heat, zeal, Old
High German eit funeral pile), from root *ai- to burn.


