satellite (n.)

1540s, follower or attendant of a superior person, from Middle French satellite (14c.), from Latin
satellitem (nominative satelles) attendant, companion, courtier, accomplice, assistant, perhaps from
Etruscan satnal (Klein), or a compound of roots *satro- full, enough + *leit- to go (Tucker);
compare English follow, which is constructed of similar roots.    Meaning planet that revolves about
a larger one first attested 1660s, in reference to the moons of Jupiter, from Latin satellites,
which was used in this sense 1610s by German astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571-1630). Galileo, who
had discovered them, called them Sidera Medic&aelig;a in honor of the Medici family. Meaning man-
made machinery orbiting the Earth first recorded 1936 as theory, 1957 as fact. Meaning country
dependent and subservient to another is recorded from 1800.


sputnik (n.)

artificial satellite, extended from the name of the one launched by the Soviet Union Oct. 4, 1957,
from Russian sputnik satellite, literally traveling companion (in this use short for sputnik zemlyi,
traveling companion of the Earth) from Old Church Slavonic supotiniku, from Russian so-, s- with,
together + put' path, way, from Old Church Slavonic poti, from PIE *pent- to tread, go (see find
(v.)) + agent suffix -nik.    The electrifying impact of the launch on the West can be gauged by the
number of new formations in -nik around this time (the suffix had been present in a Yiddish context
for at least a decade before); Laika, the stray dog launched aboard Sputnik 2 (Nov. 2, 1957), which
was dubbed muttnik in the Detroit Free Press, etc. The rival U.S. satellite which failed to reach
orbit in 1957 (because the Vanguard rocket blew up on the launch pad) derided as a kaputnik (in the
Daytona Beach Morning Journal), a dudnik (Christian Science Monitor), a flopnik (Youngstown
Vindicator, New York Times), a pffftnik (National Review), and a stayputnik (Vancouver Sun).


titan (n.)

early 15c., from Latin titan, from Greek titan, member of a mythological race of giants who
attempted to scale heaven by piling Mount Pelion on Mount Ossa but were overthrown by Zeus and the
other gods. They descended from Titan, elder brother (or grandson) of Kronos. The name is perhaps
from tito sun, day, which probably is a loan-word from a language of Asia Minor. Sense of person or
thing of enormous size or ability first recorded 1828. Applied to planet Saturn's largest satellite
in 1831; it was discovered 1655 by Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens, who named it Saturni Luna
moon of Saturn. Related: Titaness; titanian.


