satirical (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin satiricus, from Latin satira satire, poetic medley (see satire (n.)) + -al
(1). Related: Satirically.


Voltaire

name taken from 1718 by French author Fran&ccedil;ois Marie Arouet (1694-1778) after his
imprisonment in the Bastille on suspicion of having written some satirical verses; originally de
Voltaire. The signification is uncertain.


spoof (n.)

hoax, deception, 1889, from spouf (1884), name of a game invented by British comedian Arthur Roberts
(1852-1933). Sense of a parody, satirical skit or play is first recorded 1958, from verb in this
sense (1914).


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


mock (adj.)

1540s, from mock, verb and noun. Mock-heroic is attested from 1711, describing a satirical use of a
serious form; mock-turtle calf's head dressed to resemble a turtle, is from 1763; as a kind of soup
from 1783.


pasquinade (n.)

a lampoon, 1650s, from Middle French, from Italian pasquinata (c.1500), from Pasquino, name given to
a mutilated ancient statue (now known to represent Menelaus dragging the dead Patroclus) set up by
Cardinal Caraffa in his palace in Rome in 1501; the locals named it after a schoolmaster (or tailor,
or barber) named Pasquino who lived nearby. A custom developed of posting satirical verses and
lampoons on the statue.


caricature (n.)

1748 (figurative), 1750 (literal), from French caricature (18c.), from Italian caricatura satirical
picture; an exaggeration, literally an overloading, from caricare to load, exaggerate, from Vulgar
Latin carricare to load a car (see charge (v.)). The Italian form had been used in English from
1680s and was common 18c.


quixotic (adj.)

extravagantly chivalrous, 1791, from Don Quixote, romantic, impractical hero of Cervantes' satirical
novel Don Quixote de la Mancha (1605; English translation by 1620). His name literally means thigh,
also a cuisse (a piece of armor for the thigh), in Modern Spanish quijote, from Latin coxa hip.
Related: Quixotical; quixotically.


rebus (n.)

c.1600, from Latin rebus by means of objects, ablative plural of res thing, object. According to
French sources, principally from the phrase de rebus qu&aelig; geruntur of things which are going
on, in reference to the satirical pieces composed by Picardy clerks at carnivals, subtle satires of
current events using pictures to suggest words, phrases or things. Or it may be from the
representations being non verbis sed rebus not by words, but by things. In either case from Latin
res thing.


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


salmagundi (n.)

1670s, from French salmigondis (16c.), originally seasoned salt meats (compare French salmis salted
meats), from Middle French salmigondin (16c.), of uncertain origin; Watkins derives it from Latin
sal salt + condire to season, flavor. Probably related to or influenced by Old French salemine
hodgepodge of meats or fish cooked in wine, which was borrowed in Middle English as salomene (early
14c.). Figurative sense of mixture of various ingredients is from 1761; it was the title of
Washington Irving's satirical publication (1807-08). In dialect, salmon-gundy, solomon-gundy..


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


brave (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French brave, splendid, valiant, from Italian bravo brave, bold, originally
wild, savage, possibly from Medieval Latin bravus cutthroat, villain, from Latin pravus crooked,
depraved; a less likely etymology being from Latin barbarus (see barbarous). A Celtic origin (Irish
breagh, Cornish bray) also has been suggested.    Old English words for this, some with overtones of
rashness, included modig (now moody), beald (bold), cene (keen), dyrstig (daring). Brave new world
is from the title of Aldous Huxley's 1932 satirical utopian novel; he lifted the phrase from
Shakespeare (Tempest v.i.183).


quadrille (n.)

1773, lively square dance for four couples, from French quadrille (17c.), originally one of four
groups of horsemen in a tournament (a sense attested in English from 1738), from Spanish cuadrilla,
diminutive of cuadro four-sided battle square, from Latin quadrum a square, related to quattuor four
(see four). The craze for the dance hit England in 1816, and it underwent a vigorous revival late
19c. among the middle classes.    Earlier the name of a popular card game for four hands, and in
this sense from French quadrille (1725), from Spanish cuartillo, from cuarto fourth, from Latin
quartus. OED notes it as fashionable from 1726 (and was in turn superseded by whist), the year of
Swift's (or Congreve's) satirical ballad on the craze:    The commoner, and knight, the peer,  Men
of all ranks and fame,  Leave to their wives the only care,  To propagate their name;  And well that
duty they fulfil  When the good husband's at Quadrille &amp;c.;


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


