saturate (v.)

1530s, to satisfy, satiate, from Latin saturatus, past participle of saturare to fill full, sate,
drench, from satur sated, full, from PIE root *sa- to satisfy (see sad). Meaning soak thoroughly
first recorded 1756. Marketing sense first recorded 1958. Related: Saturated; saturating.


supersaturated (adj.)

1778, past participle adjective from verb supersaturate (1756), from super- + saturate (v.).


unsaturated (adj.)

1756, from un- (1) not + past participle of saturate (v.).


saturation (n.)

1550s, formed in English from saturate, or else from Late Latin saturationem (nominative saturatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of saturare. Saturation bombing is from 1942, first in
reference to Allied air raid on Cologne, Germany.


imbue (v.)

early 15c., to keep wet; to soak, saturate; also figuratively to cause to absorb (feelings,
opinions, etc.), from Latin imbuere moisten, of uncertain origin, perhaps from the same root as
imbrication. Compare also Old French embu, past participle of emboivre, from Latin imbibere drink
in, soak in (see imbibe), which might have influenced the English word. Related: Imbued; imbuing.


drench (v.)

c.1200, to submerge, drown, from Old English drencan give drink to, ply with drink, make drunk;
soak, saturate; submerge, drown, causative of drincan to drink (see drink), from Proto-Germanic
*drankijan (cognates: Old Norse drekkja, Swedish dr&auml;nka, Dutch drenken, German tr&auml;nken,
Gothic dragkjan to give to drink). Sense of to wet thoroughly by throwing liquid over is from
c.1550. Related: Drenched; drenching.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


