satyric (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin satyricus, from Greek satyrikos pertaining to a satyr or satyrs, from satyros
(see satyr).


satyriasis (n.)

excessively great venereal desire in the male, 1650s, medical Latin, from Greek satyriasis, from
satyros (see satyr). Also in same sense satyromania (1889).


satyr (n.)

woodland deity, companion of Bacchus, late 14c., from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, of unknown
origin. In pre-Roman Greek art, a man-like being with the tail and ears of a horse; the modern
conception of a being part man, part goat is from Roman sculptors, who seem to have assimilated them
to the fauns of native mythology. In some English bibles used curiously to translate Hebrew se'irim,
a type of hairy monster superstitiously believed to inhabit deserts.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


faun (n.)

late 14c., from Latin Faunus, a word of unknown origin. A god of the countryside, worshipped
especially by farmers and shepherds, equivalent of Greek Pan. Formerly men with goat horns and
tails, later with goat legs, which caused them to be assimilated to satyrs, but they have diverged
again lately.    The faun is now regarded rather as the type of unsophisticated &amp; the satyr of
unpurified man; the first is man still in intimate communion with Nature, the second is man still
swayed by bestial passions. [Fowler]    The plural is fauni.


Scratch (n.2)

in Old Scratch the Devil, 1740, from earlier Scrat, from Old Norse skratte goblin, wizard, a word
which was used in late Old English to gloss hermaphrodite; probably originally monster (compare Old
High German scraz, scrato satyr, wood demon, German Schratt, Old High German screz a goblin, imp,
dwarf; borrowed from Germanic into Slavic, as in Polish skrzat a goblin).


tragic (adj.)

1540s, calamitous, disastrous, fatal (resembling the actions in a stage tragedy), shortened from
tragical (late 15c.), modeled on Latin tragicus, from Greek tragikos of or pertaining to tragedy;
stately, majestic; plaintive, literally goatish, of or pertaining to a goat, and perhaps referring
to a satyr impersonated by a goat singer or satyric actor, from tragodia (see tragedy). Tragic flaw
(1913) translates Greek hamartia. Related: Tragically.


