savor (v.)

c.1300, from Old French savorer taste, breathe in; appreciate, care for, from Late Latin saporare,
from Latin sapor (see savor (n.)). Related: Savored; savoring.


savor (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French savor flavor, taste; sauce, seasoning; delight, pleasure, from Latin
saporem (nominative sapor) taste, flavor, related to sapere to have a flavor (see sapient).


savory (adj.)

pleasing in taste or smell, c.1200, from Old French savore tasty, flavorsome (Modern French
savour&eacute;),  past participle of savourer to taste (see savor (n.)).


flavor (n.)

c.1300, a smell, odor (usually a pleasing one), from Old French flaour smell, odor, from Vulgar
Latin flator odor, literally that which blows, from Latin flator blower, from flare to blow, puff,
which is cognate with Old English blawan (see blow (v.1)).    The same Vulgar Latin source produced
Old Italian fiatore a bad odor. Sense of taste, savor is 1690s, perhaps 1670s; originally the
element in taste which depends on the sense of smell. The -v- is perhaps from influence of savor.


Romanism (n.)

Roman Catholicism (usually, if not always, with a disparaging savor; in some contexts suggesting
political allegiance to the Vatican), 1670s, from Roman + -ism.


savour

chiefly British English spelling of savor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or. Related: Savoured;
savouring.


fond (adj.)

mid-14c., originally foolish, silly, from past tense of fonnen to fool, be foolish, perhaps from
Middle English fonne fool (early 14c.), of uncertain origin; or possibly related to fun.    Meaning
evolved by 1590 via foolishly tender to having strong affections for. Another sense of fonne was to
lose savor, which may be the original meaning of the word (as in Wyclif: Gif &thorn;e salt be fonnyd
it is not wor&thorn;i, c.1380). Related: Fonder; fondest.


smack (v.3)

mid-13c., to smell (something); mid-14c., to taste (something), perceive by taste (transitive); late
14c. to have a taste, taste of (intransitive), from smack (n.1). Compare Old English sm&#230;ccan to
taste, Old Frisian smakia Middle Dutch smaecken, Old High German smakken have a savor, scent, or
taste, German schmecken taste, try, smell, perceive. Sometimes also smatch. Now mainly in verbal
figurative use smacks of ... (first attested 1590s). Commonly but erroneously regarded as identical
with [smack (n.2)], as if 'taste' proceeds from 'smacking the lips.' [Century Dictionary]


smack (n.1)

a taste, flavor, savor especially a slight flavor that suggests something, from Old English
sm&#230;c taste; scent, odor, from Proto-Germanic *smak- (cognates: Old Frisian smek, Middle Dutch
sm&#230;ck, Dutch smaak, Old High German smac, German Geschmack, Swedish smak, Danish smag), from a
Germanic and Baltic root *smeg- meaning to taste (cognates: Lithuanian smaguriai dainties, smagus
pleasing). Meaning a trace (of something) is attested from 1530s.


taste (n.)

early 14c., act of tasting, from Old French tast sense of touch (Modern French t&acirc;t), from
taster (see taste (v.)). From late 14c. as a small portion given; also faculty or sense by which the
flavor of a thing is discerned; also savor, sapidity, flavor.    Meaning aesthetic judgment, faculty
of discerning and appreciating what is excellent is first attested 1670s (compare French go&#251;t,
German geschmack, Russian vkus, etc.).    Of all the five senses, 'taste' is the one most closely
associated with fine discrimination, hence the familiar secondary uses of words for 'taste, good
taste' with reference to aesthetic appreciation. [Buck]   <hr />  Taste is active, deciding,
choosing, changing, arranging, etc.; sensibility is passive, the power to feel, susceptibility of
impression, as from the beautiful. [Century Dictionary]


