scabbard (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French *escauberc sheath, vagina (13c.), from Frankish or another Germanic
source, from Proto-Germanic *sker-berg-, literally sword-protector, from *skar blade (source also of
Old High German scar scissors, blade, sword, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut; see shear (v.)) + *berg-
protect (source also of Old High German bergan to protect; see bury).


cojones (n.)

courage, literally balls, 1932, from Spanish cojon testicle, from Latin coleus, culleus (source of
Italian coglione), literally a leather sack, related to Greek koleos sheath, scabbard (see cell). In
English, first attested in Hemingway.


scalp (n.)

mid-14c., top of the head (including hair), presumably from a Scandinavian source (though exact
cognates are wanting) related to Old Norse skalli a bald head, skalpr sheath, scabbard,from the
source of scale (n.1). French scalpe, German, Danish, Swedish skalp are from English. Meaning head
skin and hair as proof of death or a victory trophy is from c.1600.


vagina (n.)

sexual passage of the female from the vulva to the uterus, 1680s, medical Latin, from specialized
use of Latin vagina sheath, scabbard, covering; sheath of an ear of grain, hull, husk (plural
vaginae), from PIE *wag-ina- (cognates: Lithuanian vo&#382;iu ro cover with a hollow thing), from
root *wag- to break, split, bite. Probably the ancient notion is of a sheath made from a split piece
of wood (see sheath). A modern medical word; the Latin word was not used in an anatomical sense in
classical times. Anthropological vagina dentata is attested from 1902.


sheath (n.)

Old English scea&eth;, sc&aelig;&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *skaithiz (cognates: Old Saxon scethia,
Old Norse skei&eth;ir (plural), Old Frisian skethe, Middle Dutch schede, Dutch schede, Old High
German skaida, German scheide a sheath, scabbard), according to OED, possibly from root *skei-
divide, split (see shed (v.)) on notion of a split stick with the sword blade inserted. Meaning
condom is recorded from 1861; sense of close-fitting dress or skirt is attested from 1904.


