scaffold (n.)

mid-14c., wooden framework used in building, etc., temporary structure for workmen to make walls, a
shortening of an Old North French variant of Old French eschafaut scaffold (Modern French
&#233;chafaud), probably altered (by influence of eschace a prop, support) from chaffaut, from
Vulgar Latin *catafalicum (see catafalque). Meaning platform for a hanging is from 1550s. Dutch
schavot, German Schafott, Danish skafot are from French. As a verb from 1540s.


scaffolding (n.)

temporary support, mid-14c.; see scaffold.


catafalque (n.)

1640s, from French catafalque (17c.), from Italian catafalco scaffold, from Vulgar Latin
*catafalicum, from Greek kata- down (see cata-), used in Medieval Latin with a sense of beside,
alongside + fala scaffolding, wooden siege tower, a word said to be of Etruscan origin. The Medieval
Latin word also yielded Old French chaffaut, chafaud (Modern French &#233;chafaud) scaffold.


balcony (n.)

1610s, from Italian balcone, from balco scaffold, from a Germanic source (perhaps Langobardic
*balko- beam, cognate with Old English balca beam, ridge; see balk (n.)) + Italian augmentative
suffix -one. Till c.1825, regularly accented on the second syllable.


pulpit (n.)

early 14c., from Late Latin pulpitum raised structure on which preachers stand, in classical Latin
scaffold; stage, platform for actors, of unknown origin. Also borrowed in Middle High German as
pulpit (German Pult desk). Sense of Christian preachers and ministers generally is from 1560s.
Pulpiteer, old contemptuous term for professional preacher, is recorded from 1640s.


pageant (n.)

late 14c., play in a cycle of mystery plays, from Medieval Latin pagina, of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Latin pagina page of a book (see page (n.1)) on notion of manuscript of a play.    But
an early sense in Middle English also was stage or scene of a play (late 14c.) and Klein says a
sense of Latin pagina was movable scaffold (probably from the etymological sense of stake). With
excrescent -t as in ancient (adj.). Generalized sense of showy parade, spectacle is first attested
1805, though this notion is found in pageantry (1650s).


stair (n.)

Old English st&aelig;ger stair, flight of steps, staircase, from Proto-Germanic *staigri (cognates:
Middle Dutch stegher, Dutch steiger a stair, step, quay, pier, scaffold; German Steig path, Old
English stig narrow path), from PIE *steigh- go, rise, stride, step, walk (cognates: Greek steikhein
to go, march in order, stikhos row, line, rank, verse; Sanskrit stighnoti mounts, rises, steps; Old
Church Slavonic stignati to overtake, stigna place; Lithuanian staiga suddenly; Old Irish tiagaim I
walk; Welsh taith going, walk, way). Originally also a collective plural; stairs developed by late
14c.


