scepter (n.)

c. 1300, ceptre, from Old French sceptre (12c.), from Latin sceptrum royal staff, from Greek
skeptron staff to lean on; royal scepter; in transferred use, royalty, from root of skeptein to prop
or stay, lean on. Apparently a cognate with Old English sceaft (see shaft (n.1)). The verb meaning
to furnish with a scepter is from 1520s. Related: sceptred.


scape (n.2)

shaft, stem, c. 1600, from Latin scapus a stalk, shaft, cognate with Greek skapos staff, skeptron
staff, scepter (see scepter).


sceptre

chiefly British English spelling of scepter (q.v.); for spelling, see -re. Related: Sceptred.


fleur-de-lis (n.)

also fleur-de-lys, mid-14c., from Anglo-French flour de lis lily-flower, from Old French, literally
flower of the iris, especially borne as a heraldic device on the royal arms of France. There is much
dispute over what it is meant to resemble; perhaps an iris flower, or the head of a scepter, or a
weapon of some sort. In Middle English often taken as flour delice flower of joy, lovely flower
(hence Anglo-Latin flos deliciae); also flour de luce flower of light (as if from Latin lucem).


mace (n.1)

heavy metal weapon, often with a spiked head, late 13c., from Old French mace a club, scepter
(Modern French masse), from Vulgar Latin *mattea (source also of Italian mazza, Spanish maza mace),
from Latin mateola (in Late Latin also matteola) a kind of mallet. The Latin word perhaps is cognate
with Sanskrit matyam harrow, club, Old Church Slavonic motyka mattock, Old High German medela plow
[Klein]. As a symbol of authority or office from mid-15c.


shaft (n.1)

Old English sceaft long, slender rod, staff, pole; spear-shaft; spear, from Proto-Germanic *skaftaz
(cognates: Old Norse skapt, Old Saxon skaft, Old High German scaft, German schaft, Dutch schacht,
not found in Gothic), which some connect with a Germanic passive past participle of PIE root
*(s)kep- to cut, to scrape (source of Old English scafan to shave, scrape, polish) on notion of tree
branch stripped of its bark. But compare Latin scapus shaft, stem, shank, Greek skeptron a staff
(see scepter) which appear to be cognates.    Meaning beam or ray (of light, etc.) is attested from
c. 1300. Sense of an arrow is from c. 1400; that of a handle from 1520s. Mechanical sense is from
1680s. Vulgar slang meaning penis first recorded 1719 on notion of columnar part (late 14c.); hence
probably shaft (v.) and the related noun sense act of unfair treatment (1959), though some early
sources insist this is from the notion of a wound.


