scheme (v.)

devise a scheme, 1767 (earlier reduce to a scheme, 1716), from scheme (n.). Related: Schemed;
scheming.


schemer (n.)

1724, a contriver, plotter, agent noun from scheme (v.).


scheme (n.)

1550s, figure of speech, from Medieval Latin schema shape, figure, form, appearance; figure of
speech; posture in dancing, from Greek skhema (genitive skhematos) figure, appearance, the nature of
a thing, related to skhein to get, and ekhein to have, from PIE root *segh- to hold, to hold in
one's power, to have (cognates: Sanskrit sahate he masters, overcomes, sahah power, victory; Avestan
hazah power, victory; Greek ekhein to have, hold; Gothic sigis, Old High German sigu, Old Norse
sigr, Old English sige victory).    The sense program of action first is attested 1640s. Unfavorable
overtones (selfish, devious) began to creep in early 18c. Meaning complex unity of coordinated
component elements is from 1736. Color scheme is attested from 1884.


project (n.)

c.1400, a plan, draft, scheme, from Latin proiectum something thrown forth, noun use of neuter of
proiectus, past participle of proicere stretch out, throw forth, from pro- forward (see pro-) +
combining form of iacere (past participle iactus) to throw (see jet (v.)).    Meaning scheme,
proposal, mental plan is from c.1600. Meaning group of low-rent apartment buildings first recorded
1935, American English, short for housing project (1932). Related: Projects. Project manager
attested from 1913.


Ponzi scheme

investment scam by which early investors are paid off from the contributions of later ones, 1957, in
reference to Charles Ponzi (1882-1949), who perpetrated such a scam in U.S., 1919-20.


scrap (n.2)

fight, 1846, possibly a variant of scrape (n.1) on the notion of an abrasive encounter. Weekley and
OED suggest obsolete colloquial scrap scheme, villainy, vile intention (1670s).


schematic (adj.)

pertaining to schemes, 1701, from Latin stem of scheme (n.) + -ic. Noun meaning diagram is first
attested 1929. Related: Schematical (1670s).


cathexis (n.)

1922, from Latinized form of Greek kathexis holding, retention, from PIE root *segh- to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Used by psychologists to render Freud's (libido)besetzung.


schema (n.)

plural schemata, 1796, in Kantian philosophy (a product of the imagination intermediary between an
image and a concept), from Greek skhema (see scheme (n.)). Meaning diagrammatic representation is
from 1890; general sense of hypothetical outline is by 1939.


snowball (v.)

to make snowballs, 1680s, from snowball (n.); sense of to throw snowballs at (someone) is from 1850.
Meaning to increase rapidly is attested from 1929, though the image of a snowball increasing in size
as it rolls along had been used since at least 1613, and a noun sense of a pyramid scheme is
attested from 1892. Related: Snowballed; snowballing.


synechia (n.)

plural synechiae, morbid union of parts, especially of the eye, 1842, medical Latin, from Greek
synekheia continuity, from synekhes continuous, from syn together (see syn-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)).


gin (n.2)

machine for separating cotton from seeds, 1796, American English, used earlier of various other
machineries, from Middle English gin ingenious device, contrivance (c.1200), from Old French gin
machine, device, scheme, shortened form of engin, from Latin ingenium (see engine). The verb in this
sense is recorded from 1789.


entelechy (n.)

c.1600, from Greek entelekheia, from en in (see en- (2)) + telei, dative of telos perfection (see
tele-) + ekhein to have (see scheme (n.)). In Aristotle, the condition in which a potentiality has
become an actuality.


Ophiuchus

constellation (representing Aesculapius), 1650s, from Latin, from Greek ophioukhos, literally
holding a serpent, from ophis serpent (see ophio-) + stem of ekhein to hold, have, keep (see scheme
(n.)). The constellation is equatorial, and Milton's Ophiuchus huge in th' Arctick Sky (Paradise
Lost) is a rare lapse for a poet who generally knew his astronomy.


forecast (v.)

late 14c., to scheme, from fore- before + casten in the sense of contrive, plan, prepare (late 14c.;
see cast (v.)). Meaning predict events first attested late 15c. (cast (v.) to perceive, notice is
from late 14c.). Related: Forecasted; forecasting.


machination (n.)

late 15c., a plotting, intrigue, from Old French machinacion plot, conspiracy, scheming, intrigue,
from Latin machinationem (nominative machinatio) device, contrivance, machination, noun of action
from past participle stem of machinari contrive skillfully, to design; to scheme, to plot, from
machina (see machine (n.)). Related: Machinations.


Douglas

family name (late 12c.), later masc. personal name, from Gaelic Dubh glas the dark water, name of a
place in Lanarkshire. As a given name, in the top 40 for boys born in U.S. from 1942 to 1971.
Douglas fir named for David Douglas (1798-1834), Scottish botanist who first recorded it in Pacific
Northwest, 1825. Douglas scheme, Douglas plan, Douglassite, etc. refer to social credit economic
model put forth by British engineer Maj. Clifford Hugh Douglas (1879-1952).


intrigue (v.)

1610s, to trick, deceive, cheat (earlier entriken, late 14c.), from French intriguer (16c.), from
Italian intrigare to plot, meddle, from Latin intricare entangle (see intricate). Meaning to plot or
scheme first recorded 1714; that of to excite curiosity is from 1894. Related: Intrigued; intriguing
(1680s, plotting, scheming; meaning exciting curiosity is from 1909).


cachexia (n.)

bad general state of health, 1540s, from Latinized form of Greek kakhexia bad habits, from kakos bad
(see caco-) + -exia, related to exis habit or state, from exein to have, be in a condition, from PIE
root *segh- to hold, hold in one's power, to have (see scheme (n.)). Related: cachexic.


rig (v.)

late 15c., originally nautical, to fit with sails, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare
Danish, Norwegian rigge to equip, Swedish rigga to rig, harness), though these may be from English;
perhaps ultimately from PIE *reig- to bind. Slang meaning to pre-arrange or tamper with results is
attested from 1938, perhaps a different word, from rig (n.) a trick, swindle, scheme (1775), earlier
sport, banter, ridicule (1725), of unknown origin. Also there is rig (v.) ransack from 1560s,
likewise of unknown origin. Related: Rigged; rigging.


hector (n.)

late 14c., a valiant warrior, 1650s as slang for a blustering, turbulent, pervicacious, noisy fellow
[Johnson], Heck for short, both in reference to the provocative character of Hektor, Trojan hero,
oldest son of Priam and Hecuba, in the Iliad. It represents Greek hektor, literally holder, stayer;
an agent noun from ekhein to have, hold, possess (see scheme). The word was used mid-1600s in
reference to London street gangs. As a proper name it is rare in England but used in Scotland to
render Gaelic Eachdonn.


epoch (n.)

1610s, epocha, point marking the start of a new period in time (such as the founding of Rome, the
birth of Christ, the Hegira), from Late Latin epocha, from Greek epokhe stoppage, fixed point of
time, from epekhein to pause, take up a position, from epi on (see epi-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Transferred sense of a period of time is 1620s; geological usage (not a precise
measurement) is from 1802.


accent (n.)

late 14c., particular mode of pronunciation, from Middle French accent, from Old French acent
(13c.), from Latin accentus song added to speech, from ad- to (see ad-) + cantus a singing, past
participle of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Loan-translation of Greek prosoidia, from pros- to +
oide song, which apparently described the pitch scheme in Greek verse. The decorating sense of
something that emphasizes or highlights is from 1972.


plot (n.)

Old English plot small piece of ground, of unknown origin. Sense of ground plan, and thus map, chart
is 1550s; that of a secret, plan, scheme is 1580s, probably by accidental similarity to complot,
from Old French complot combined plan, of unknown origin, perhaps a back-formation from compeloter
to roll into a ball, from pelote ball. Meaning set of events in a story is from 1640s. Plot-line
(n.) attested from 1957.


severity (n.)

late 15c., austerity or strictness of life, from Middle French severite, from Latin severitas
seriousness, strictness, sternness, from severus stern, strict, serious, of uncertain origin.
Possibly from PIE root *segh- to have, hold (see scheme (n.)), or possibly from *se vero without
kindness, from se without (see secret) + *vero kindness, neuter ablative of verus true (see very).
Meaning strictness in dealing with others is recorded from 1520s.


meter (n.1)

also metre, poetic measure, Old English meter meter, versification, from Latin metrum, from Greek
metron meter, a verse; that by which anything is measured; measure, length, size, limit, proportion,
from PIE root *me- (2) to measure (see meter (n.2)). Possibly reborrowed early 14c. (after a
300-year gap in recorded use) from Old French metre, with specific sense of metrical scheme in
verse, from Latin metrum.


platform (n.)

1540s, plan of action, scheme, design, from Middle French plateforme, platte fourme, literally flat
form, from Old French plat flat (see plateau (n.)) + forme form (see form (n.)). The literal sense
of raised, level surface in English is first recorded 1550s. Political meaning, statement of party
policies, is from 1803, probably originally an image of a literal platform on which politicians
gather, stand, and make their appeals, perhaps influenced by earlier sense of set of rules governing
church doctrine (first attested 1570s). Railroad station sense is from 1838.


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


eunuch (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French eunuque and directly from Latin eunuchus, from Greek eunoukhos
castrated man, originally guard of the bedchamber or harem, from euno-, comb. form of eune bed, of
unknown origin, + -okhos, from stem of ekhein to have, hold (see scheme (n.)).    The Greek and
Latin forms of the word were used to translate Hebrew saris, which sometimes meant merely palace
official, in Septuagint and Vulgate, probably without an intended comment on the qualities of
bureaucrats.Eunuches is he &thorn;at is i-gilded, and suche were somtyme i-made wardeynes of ladyes
in Egipt. [John of Trevisa, translation of Higdon's Polychronicon, 1387]


plan (n.)

1670s as a technical term in perspective drawing; 1706 as drawing, sketch, or diagram of any object,
from French plan ground plan, map, literally plane surface (mid-16c.), from Latin planum level or
flat surface, noun use of adjective planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). The notion is of a drawing
on a flat surface. Meaning scheme of action, design is first recorded 1706, possibly influenced by
French planter to plant, from Italian planta ground plan.


hectic (adj.)

late 14c., etik (in fever etik), from Old French etique consumptive, from Late Latin hecticus, from
Greek hektikos continuous, habitual, consumptive (of a disease, because of the constant fever), from
hexis a habit (of mind or body), from ekhein have, hold, continue (see scheme).    The Latin -h- was
restored in English 16c. Sense of feverishly exciting, full of disorganized activity first recorded
1904, but hectic also was used in Middle English as a noun meaning feverish desire, consuming
passion (early 15c.). Hectic fevers are characterized by rapid pulse, among other symptoms. Related:
Hecticness.


theory (n.)

1590s, conception, mental scheme, from Late Latin theoria (Jerome), from Greek theoria
contemplation, speculation; a looking at, viewing; a sight, show, spectacle, things looked at, from
theorein to consider, speculate, look at, from theoros spectator, from thea a view (see theater) +
horan to see, possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)).    Earlier in this sense
was theorical (n.), late 15c. Sense of principles or methods of a science or art (rather than its
practice) is first recorded 1610s (as in music theory, which is the science of musical composition,
apart from practice or performance). Sense of an intelligible explanation based on observation and
reasoning is from 1630s.


program (n.)

1630s, public notice, from Late Latin programma proclamation, edict, from Greek programma a written
public notice, from stem of prographein to write publicly, from pro- forth (see pro-) + graphein to
write (see -graphy).    General sense of a definite plan or scheme is recorded from 1837. Meaning
list of pieces at a concert, playbill first recorded 1805 and retains the original sense. That of
objects or events suggested by music is from 1854. Sense of broadcasting presentation is from 1923.
Computer sense (noun and verb) is from 1945. Spelling programme, established in Britain, is from
French in modern use and began to be used early 19c., originally especially in the playbill sense.
Program music attested from 1877.


sonnet (n.)

1557 (in title of Surrey's poems), from Middle French sonnet (1540s) or directly from Italian
sonetto, literally little song, from Old Proven&ccedil;al sonet song, diminutive of son song, sound,
from Latin sonus sound (see sound (n.1)).    Originally in English also any short lyric poem;
precise meaning is from Italian, where Petrarch (14c.) developed a scheme of an eight-line stanza
(rhymed abba abba) followed by a six-line stanza (cdecde, the Italian sestet, or cdcdcd, the
Sicilian sestet). Shakespeare developed the English Sonnet for his rhyme-poor native tongue: three
Sicilian quatrains followed by a heroic couplet (ababcdcdefefgg). The first stanza sets a situation
or problem, and the second comments on it or resolves it.


Siegfried

masc. proper name, German Siegfried, first element from Old High German sigu victory,  from Proto-
Germanic *sigiz- victory (cognates: Old Frisian si, Old Saxon sigi, Middle Dutch seghe, Dutch zege,
German Sieg, Old Norse sigr, Danish seier, Gothic sigis, Old English sige victory, success,
triumph), from PIE root *segh- to have, to hold (cognates: Sanskrit saha- victory, sahate overcomes,
masters; see scheme (n.)).    Second element from Old High German frithu peace, from PIE *pri-tu-,
from root *pri- to love (see free (adj.)). Siegfried Line, World War I German fortifications in
France, is from German Siegfriedlinie, named for the hero in Wagner's Ring cycle.


sketch (n.)

rough drawing intended to serve as the basis for a finished picture, 1660s, from Dutch schets or Low
German skizze, both apparently 17c. artists' borrowings from Italian schizzo sketch, drawing, which
is commonly said to be from Latin *schedius (OED compares schedia raft, schedium an extemporaneous
poem), from or related to Greek skhedios temporary, extemporaneous, done or made off-hand, related
to skhema form, shape, appearance (see scheme (n.)). But according to Barnhart Italian schizzo is a
special use of schizzo a splash, squirt, from schizzare to splash or squirt, of uncertain origin.
Extended sense of brief account is from 1660s; meaning short play or performance, usually comic is
from 1789. Sketch-book recorded from 1820. German Skizze, French esquisse, Spanish esquicio are
likewise from Italian schizzo.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


rhyme (n.)

agreement in terminal sounds, 1560s, partially restored spelling, from Middle English ryme, rime
(c.1200) measure, meter, rhythm, later rhymed verse (mid-13c.), from Old French rime (fem.), related
to Old Proven&ccedil;al rim (masc.), earlier *ritme, from Latin rithmus, from Greek rhythmos
measured motion, time, proportion (see rhythm).    In Medieval Latin, rithmus was used for
accentual, as opposed to quantitative, verse, and accentual verse usually was rhymed, hence the
sense shift. Persistence of older form is due to popular association with Old English rim number,
from PIE root *re(i)- to reason, count (see read (v.)). Phrase rhyme or reason good sense (chiefly
used in the negative) is from late 15c. (see reason (n.)). Rhyme scheme is attested from 1931. Rhyme
royal (1841) is a stanza of seven 10-syllable lines rhymed a-b-a-b-b-c-c.


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


caucus (n.)

private meeting of party leaders, 1763, American English (New England), perhaps from an Algonquian
word caucauasu counselor, elder, adviser in the dialect of Virginia, or from the Caucus Club of
Boston, a 1760s social &amp; political club whose name possibly derived from Modern Greek kaukos
drinking cup. Another old guess is caulker's (meeting) [Pickering, 1816], but OED finds this
dismissable.    caucus: This noun is used throughout the United States, as a cant term for those
meetings, which are held by the different political parties, for the purpose of agreeing upon
candidates for office, or concerting any measure, which they intend to carry at the subsequent
public, or town meetings. [John Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which
Have Been Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]   <hr />   The word
caucus, and its derivative caucusing, are often used in Boston. The last answers much to what we
stile parliamenteering or electioneering. All my repeated applications to different gentlemen have
not furnished me with a satisfactory account of the origin of caucus. It seems to mean, a number of
persons, whether more or less, met together to consult upon adopting and prosecuting some scheme of
policy, for carrying a favorite point. [William Gordon, History, Rise, Progress, and Establishment
of the Independence of the United States of America, London, 1788]


school (n.1)

place of instruction, Old English scol, from Latin schola intermission of work, leisure for
learning; learned conversation, debate; lecture; meeting place for teachers and students, place of
instruction; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect, from Greek skhole spare time, leisure,
rest ease; idleness; that in which leisure is employed; learned discussion; also a place for
lectures, school; originally a holding back, a keeping clear, from skhein to get (from PIE root
*segh- to hold, hold in one's power, to have; see scheme (n.)) + -ole by analogy with bole a throw,
stole outfit, etc.    The original notion is leisure, which passed to otiose discussion (in Athens
or Rome the favorite or proper use for free time), then place for such discussion. The Latin word
was widely borrowed (Old French escole, French &eacute;cole, Spanish escuela, Italian scuola, Old
High German scuola, German Schule, Swedish skola, Gaelic sgiol, Welsh ysgol, Russian shkola).
Translated in Old English as larhus, literally lore house, but this seems to have been a glossary
word only.    Meaning students attending a school in English is attested from c.1300; sense of
school building is first recorded 1590s. Sense of people united by a general similarity of
principles and methods is from 1610s; hence school of thought (1864). School of hard knocks rough
experience in life is recorded from 1912 (in George Ade); to tell tales out of school betray
damaging secrets is from 1540s. School bus is from 1908. School days is from 1590s. School board
from 1870.


