schism (n.)

late 14c., scisme, dissention within the church, from Old French scisme, cisme a cleft, split
(12c.), from Church Latin schisma, from Greek skhisma (genitive skhismatos) division, cleft, in New
Testament applied metaphorically to divisions in the Church (I Cor. xii.25), from stem of skhizein
to split (see shed (v.)). Spelling restored 16c., but pronunciation unchanged. Often in reference to
the Great Schism (1378-1417) in the Western Church.


schismatic

late 14c. (n.); mid-15c. (adj.), from Old French scismatique (Modern French schismatique), from
Church Latin schismaticus, from Greek skhismatikos, from schisma (see schism). Used also as a noun
in Old French and Late Latin. Related: Schismatical; schismatically.


Raskolnik

dissenter from the Russian Church, an Old Believer, 1723, from Russian Raskolnik separatist, from
raskol schism, separation. The schism was a result of reforms by Patriarch Nikon in 1667.


Donatist (n.)

mid-15c., adherent of a Christian sect in 4c. North Africa, from Medieval Latin Donatista, from
Donatus name of two of the principal men in it. The schism had more to do with episcopal succession
in Carthage than with doctrine. The name is literally bestowed, given.


Nicene (adj.)

early 15c., in reference to Nicaea (Greek Nikaia, modern Turkish Isnik), city in Bithynia where
ecclesiastical council of 325 C.E. dealt with the Arian schism and produced the Nicene Creed. A
second council held there (787) considered the question of images.


sch-

this letter group can represent five distinct sounds in English; it first was used by Middle English
writers to render Old English sc-, a sound now generally pronounced (and spelled) -sh-. Sometimes it
was miswritten for -ch-. It also was taken in from German (schnapps) and Yiddish (schlemiel). In
words derived from classical languages, it represents Latin sch-, Greek skh-, but in some of these
words the spelling is a restoration and the pronunciation does not follow it (as in schism).


secession (n.)

1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal,
insurrection, schism, noun of action from past participle stem of secedere secede, from se- apart
(see secret) + cedere to go (see cede). Originally in a Roman historical context, temporary
migration of plebeians from the city to compel patricians to address their grievances; modern use in
reference to religious or political unions dates from 1650s.


poplin (n.)

type of corded fabric, 1710, from French papeline cloth of fine silk and worsted (1660s), probably
from Proven&ccedil;al papalino, fem. of papalin of or belonging to the pope, from Medieval Latin
papalis papal (see papal). The reference is to Avignon, papal residence during the schism 1309-1408
(and regarded as a papal town until 1791), which also was a center of silk manufacture. Influenced
in English by Poperinghe, town in Flanders where the fabric was made (but from 18c. the primary
source was Ireland).


-sch-

this letter group can represent five distinct sounds in English; it first was used by Middle English
writers to render Old English sc-, the pronunciation of which then simplified to -sh- (an evolution
that also took place in Middle Dutch and Middle High German). Sometimes it was miswritten for -ch-.
It also was taken in from German (schnapps) and Yiddish (schlemiel). In words derived from classical
languages, it represents Latin sch-, Greek skh- but in some of these words (such as schism) the
English spelling is a restoration and the pronunciation does not follow it.


