scholarly (adj.)

1630s, from scholar + -ly (1). Related: Scholarliness.


academic (adj.)

1580s, relating to an academy, also collegiate, scholarly, from Latin academicus of the Academy,
from academia (see academy). Meaning theoretical, not practical, not leading to a decision (such as
university debates or classroom legal exercises) is from 1886. Academic freedom is attested from
1901. Related: Academically.


caitiff (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, base, cowardly, from Old North French caitive captive, miserable (Old French
chaitif, 12c., Modern French ch&eacute;tif puny, sickly, poor, weak), from Latin captivum (see
captive, which was a later, scholarly borrowing of the same word). In most Romance languages, it has
acquired a pejorative sense.


obit (n.)

late 14c., death, from Middle French obit or directly from Latin obitus death, noun use of past
participle of obire to die, literally to go toward (see obituary). In modern usage (since 1874) it
is usually a clipped form of obituary, though it had the same meaning of published death notice
15c.-17c. The scholarly abbreviation ob. with date is from Latin obiit (he) died, third person
singular of obire.


obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


aesthetic (n.)

1798, from German &Auml;sthetisch or French esth&eacute;tique, both from Greek aisthetikos
sensitive, perceptive, from aisthanesthai to perceive (by the senses or by the mind), to feel, from
PIE *awis-dh-yo-, from root *au- to perceive (see audience).  Popularized in English by translation
of Immanuel Kant, and used originally in the classically correct sense the science which treats of
the conditions of sensuous perception. Kant had tried to correct the term after Alexander Baumgarten
had taken it in German to mean criticism of taste (1750s), but Baumgarten's sense attained
popularity in English c.1830s (despite scholarly resistance) and removed the word from any
philosophical base. Walter Pater used it (1868) to describe the late 19c. movement that advocated
art for art's sake, which further blurred the sense. As an adjective by 1803. Related:
Aesthetically.


work (n.)

Old English weorc, worc something done, discreet act performed by someone, action (whether voluntary
or required), proceeding, business; that which is made or manufactured, products of labor, also
physical labor, toil; skilled trade, craft, or occupation; opportunity of expending labor in some
useful or remunerative way; also military fortification, from Proto-Germanic *werkan (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch werk, Old Norse verk, Middle Dutch warc, Old High German werah, German
Werk, Gothic gawaurki), from PIE *werg-o-, from root *werg- to do (see organ).    Work is less
boring than amusing oneself. [Baudelaire, Mon Coeur mis a nu, 1862]    In Old English, the noun also
had the sense of fornication. Meaning physical effort, exertion is from c.1200; meaning scholarly
labor or its productions is from c.1200; meaning artistic labor or its productions is from c.1200.
Meaning labor as a measurable commodity is from c.1300. Meaning embroidery, stitchery, needlepoint
is from late 14c. Work of art attested by 1774 as artistic creation, earlier (1728) artifice,
production of humans (as opposed to nature). Work ethic recorded from 1959. To be out of work
unemployed is from 1590s. To make clean work of is from c.1300; to make short work of is from 1640s.
Proverbial expression many hands make light work is from c.1300. To have (one's) work cut out for
one is from 1610s; to have it prepared and prescribed, hence, to have all one can handle. Work in
progress is from 1930 in a general sense, earlier as a specific term in accountancy and
parliamentary procedure.


