scion (n.)

c.1300, a shoot or twig, especially one for grafting, from Old French sion, cion descendant; shoot,
twig; offspring (12c., Modern French scion, Picard chion), of uncertain origin. OED rejects
derivation from Old French scier to saw. Perhaps a diminutive from Frankish *kid-, from Proto-
Germanic *kidon-, from PIE *geie- to sprout, split, open (see chink (n.1)). Figurative use is
attested from 1580s in English; meaning an heir, a descendant is from 1814, from the family tree
image.


stirpes (n.)

plural of stirps, Latin, literally stem, stalk, trunk of a plant, figuratively scion, offspring,
descendant; source, origin, foundation, beginning. Hence stirpiculture breeding of special stocks or
strains.


verbena (n.)

genus of plants, the vervain, 1560s, from Latin verbena leaves or twigs of olive, myrtle, laurel, or
other sacred plants employed in religious ceremonies, from PIE *werbh- (cognates: Lithuanian virbas
twig, branch, scion, rod), from root *werb- to turn, bend (see warp (v.)).


thallus (n.)

1829, Latin, from Greek thallos green shoot, young branch, twig, related to thalia abundance, thalos
scion, child, ultimately from PIE root *dhal- to bloom (cognates: Armenian dalar green, fresh,
Albanian dal' I sprout, Old Irish duilesc, a type of algae).


rhabdomancy (n.)

1640s, use of divining rod (especially to discover ores or underground water), from Greek rhabdos
rod, wand; magic wand; fishing rod; spear-shaft; a staff of office; a rod for chastisement; twig,
stick + manteia divination, oracle (see -mancy). Greek rhabdos is from PIE *wer-, base of roots
meaning to turn, bend (cognates: Lithuanian virbas twig, branch, scion, rod, Latin verbena leaves
and branches of laurel); see warp (v.); the Greek noun was used to represent Roman fasces. Related:
Rhabdomantic


rod (n.)

Old English rodd a rod, pole, which is probably cognate with Old Norse rudda club, from Proto-
Germanic *rudd- stick, club, from PIE *reudh- to clear land.    As a long, tapering elastic pole for
fishing, from mid-15c. Figurative sense of offshoot (mid-15c.) led to Biblical meaning scion, tribe.
As an instrument of punishment, attested from mid-12c.; also used figuratively for any sort of
correction or punishment, but the basic notion is of beating someone with a stick.    As a unit of
measure (5&#189; yards or 16&#189; feet, also called perch or pole) first attested mid-15c., from
the stick used to measure it off. As a measure of area, a square perch, from late 15c., the usual
measure in brickwork. Meaning light-sensitive cell in a retina is from 1866, so-called for its
shape. Slang meaning penis is recorded from 1902; that of gun, revolver is from 1903.


put (v.)

late Old English *putian, implied in putung instigation, an urging, literally a putting; related to
pytan put out, thrust out (of eyes), probably from a Germanic stem that also produced Danish putte
to put, Swedish dialectal putta; Middle Dutch pote scion, plant, Dutch poten to plant, Old Norse
pota to poke.    Meaning act of casting a heavy stone overhead (as a trial of strength) is attested
from c.1300. Obsolete past tense form putted is attested 14c.-15c. To put down end by force or
authority (a rebellion, etc.) is from c.1300. Adjective phrase put out angry, upset is first
recorded 1887; to put out, of a woman, to offer oneself for sex is from 1947. To put upon (someone)
play a trick on, impose on is from 1690s. To put up with tolerate, accept (1755) was originally to
put up, as in to pocket. To put (someone) on deceive is from 1958.


