scoffer (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from scoff (v.).


scofflaw (n.)

1924, from scoff (v.) + law (n.). The winning entry in a national contest during Prohibition to coin
a word to characterize a person who drinks illegally, chosen from more than 25,000 entries; the $200
winning prize was split between two contestants who sent in the word separately: Henry Irving Dale
and Miss Kate L. Butler. Other similar attempts did not stick, such as pitilacker (1926), winning
entry in a contest by the Pennsylvania Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to establish
a scolding word for one who mistreats animals (submitted by Mrs. M. McIlvaine Bready of Mickleton,
N.J.).


scoff (v.)

mid-14c., jest, make light of something; mid-15c., make fun of, mock, from the noun meaning
contemptuous ridicule (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skaup, skop mockery,
ridicule, Middle Danish skof jest, mockery; perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub-, *skuf- (cognates:
Old English scop poet, Old High German scoph fiction, sport, jest, derision), from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)).


squib (n.)

1520s, short bit of sarcastic writing, witty scoff, of unknown origin. If the meaning small firework
that burns with a hissing noise (also 1520s) is the original one, the word might be imitative.


scop (n.)

poet, minstrel, Old English scop, cognate with Old High German scoph poetry, sport, jest, Old Norse
skop railing, mockery (see scoff (v.)).


scarf (v.)

eat hastily, 1960, U.S. teen slang, originally a noun meaning food, meal (1932), perhaps imitative,
or from scoff (attested in a similar sense from 1846). Or perhaps from a dialectal survival of Old
English sceorfan to gnaw, bite (see scarf (n.2)); a similar word is found in a South African context
in the 1600s. Related: Scarfed; scarfing.


rail (v.1)

complain, mid-15c., from Middle French railler to tease or joke (15c.), perhaps from Old
Proven&ccedil;al ralhar scoff, to chat, to joke, from Vulgar Latin *ragulare to bray (source also of
Italian ragghiare to bray), from Late Latin ragere to roar, probably of imitative origin. See rally
(v.2). Related: Railed; railing.


faith-healer (n.)

Also faith healer, attested by 1874; from faith + healer.    The power which a man's imagination has
over his body to heal it or make it sick is a force which none of us is born without. The first man
had it, the last one will possess it. If left to himself, a man is most likely to use only the
mischievous half of the force--the half which invents imaginary ailments for him and cultivates
them; and if he is one of those very wise people, he is quite likely to scoff at the beneficent half
of the force and deny its existence. [Mark Twain, Christian Science, 1907]


insult (v.)

1560s, triumph over in an arrogant way, from Middle French insulter (14c.) and directly from Latin
insultare to assail, to leap upon (already used by Cicero in sense of insult, scoff at, revile),
frequentative of insilire leap at or upon, from in- on, at (see in- (2)) + salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)). Sense of to verbally abuse, affront, assail with disrespect is from 1610s. Related:
Insulted; insulting.


poet (n.)

early 14c., a poet, a singer (c.1200 as a surname), from Old French poete (12c., Modern French
po&#232;te) and directly from Latin poeta a poet, from Greek poetes maker, author, poet, variant of
poietes, from poein, poiein to make, create, compose, from PIE *kwoiwo- making, from root *kwei- to
pile up, build, make (cognates: Sanskrit cinoti heaping up, piling up, Old Church Slavonic &#269;inu
act, deed, order).    Replaced Old English scop (which survives in scoff). Used in 14c., as in
classical languages, for all sorts of writers or composers of works of literature. Po&egrave;te
maudit, a poet insufficiently appreciated by his contemporaries, literally cursed poet, attested by
1930, from French (1884, Verlaine). For poet laureate see laureate.


gaudy (adj.)

showy, tastelessly rich, 1580s, probably ultimately from Middle English gaudi large, ornamental bead
in a rosary (early 14c.); but there is a parallel sense of gaudy as full of trickery (1520s), from
Middle English gaud deception, trick, from gaudi a jest, trick, possibly from Anglo-French gaudir be
merry, scoff, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy).    Alternative etymology of the adjective is
from Middle English gaudegrene yellowish-green (early 14c.), originally green dye obtained from a
plant formerly known as weld, from a Germanic source (see weld (n.)), which became gaude in Old
French. The English term supposedly shifted sense from weld-dye to bright. As a noun, feast,
festival 1650s, from gaudy day day of rejoicing (1560s).


