score (v.)

to cut with incisions or notches, c.1400; to record by means of notches (late 14c.); see score (n.).
Meanings to keep record of the scores in a game, etc. and to make or add a point for one's side in a
game, etc. both attested from 1742. The slang sense, in reference to men, achieve intercourse first
recorded 1960. Meaning to be scorekeeper, to keep the score in a game or contest is from 1846. In
the musical sense from 1839. Related: Scored; scoring.


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


scoreless (adj.)

in games, 1880, from score (n.) + -less.


bogey (n.2)

in golfing, c.1891, originally number of strokes a good player is supposed to need for a given hole
or course; later, score one over par (1946); from the same source as bogey (n.1), on the notion of a
phantom opponent, represented by the ground score. The word was in vogue at the time in Britain
because of the popularity of a music hall tune Hush, Hush, Hush, Here Comes the Bogey Man.One
popular song at least has left its permanent effect on the game of golf. That song is 'The Bogey
Man.' In 1890 Dr. Thos. Browne, R.N., the hon. secretary of the Great Yarmouth Club, was playing
against a Major Wellman, the match being against the 'ground score,' which was the name given to the
scratch value of each hole. The system of playing against the 'ground score' was new to Major
Wellman, and he exclaimed, thinking of the song of the moment, that his mysterious and well-nigh
invincible opponent was a regular 'bogey-man.' The name 'caught on' at Great Yarmouth, and to-day
'Bogey' is one of the most feared opponents on all the courses that acknowledge him. [1908, cited in
OED]  Other early golfing sources give it an American origin. As a verb, attested by 1948.


hundred (n.)

Old English hundred the number of 100, a counting of 100, from Proto-Germanic *hundrath (cognates:
Old Norse hundra&eth;, German hundert); first element is Proto-Germanic *hundam hundred (cognate
with Gothic hund, Old High German hunt), from PIE *km-tom hundred, reduced from *dkm-tom- (cognates:
Sanskrit satam, Avestan satem, Greek hekaton, Latin centum, Lithuanian simtas, Old Church Slavonic
suto, Old Irish cet, Breton kant hundred), from *dekm- ten (see ten).    Second element is Proto-
Germanic *rath reckoning, number (as in Gothic ra&thorn;jo a reckoning, account, number,
gara&thorn;jan to count; see read (v.)). The common word for the number in Old English was simple
hund, and Old English also used hund-teontig.    In Old Norse hundrath meant 120, that is the long
hundred of six score, and at a later date, when both the six-score hundred and the five-score
hundred were in use, the old or long hundred was styled hundrath tolf-roett ... meaning duodecimal
hundred, and the new or short hundred was called hundrath ti-r&aelig;tt, meaning decimal hundred.
The Long Hundred and its use in England was discussed by Mr W.H. Stevenson, in 1889, in the
Archc&aelig;ological Review (iv. 313-27), where he stated that amongst the Teutons, who longest
preserved their native customs unimpaired by the influence of Latin Christianity, the hundred was
generally the six-score hundred. The short hundred was introduced among the Northmen in the train of
Christianity. [Transactions of the Lancashire and Cheshire Antiquarian Society, 1907]    Meaning
division of a county or shire with its own court (still in some British place names and U.S. state
of Delaware) was in Old English and probably represents 100 hides of land. The Hundred Years War
(which ran intermittently from 1337 to 1453) was first so called in 1874. The original Hundred Days
was the period between Napoleon's restoration and his final abdication in 1815.


scotch (n.2)

incision, cut, score, gash, mid-15c., related to scotch (v.).


tally (n.)

mid-15c., stick marked with notches to indicate amount owed or paid, from Anglo-French tallie (early
14c., Old French taille notch in a piece of wood signifying a debt), Anglo-Latin talea (late 12c.),
from Medieval Latin tallia, from Latin talea a cutting, rod, stick (see tailor (n.), and compare
sense history of score). Meaning a thing that matches another first recorded 1650s, from practice of
splitting a tally lengthwise across the notches, debtor and creditor each retaining one of the
halves; the usual method of keeping accounts before writing became general (the size of the notches
varied with the amount). Sports sense of a total score is from 1856. Also in 19c. British provincial
verbal expression live tally, make a tally bargain live as husband and wife without marrying.


underscore (v.)

1771, to draw a line under, from under + score (v.). The figurative sense of to emphasize is
attested from 1891. Noun meaning a line drawn below (something) is recorded from 1901.


fourscore (n.)

eighty, mid-13c., formerly current as an ordinary numeral [OED], from four + score (n.).


ace (v.)

to score (in sports), 1923, from ace (n.). This led in turn to the extended student slang sense of
get high marks (1959). Related: Aced; acing.


bilk (v.)

1650s, from or along with the noun (1630s), first used as a cribbage term; as a verb, to spoil
(someone's) score. Origin obscure, it was believed in 17c. to be a word signifying nothing; perhaps
it s a thinned form of balk to hinder. Meaning to defraud is first recorded 1670s. Related: Bilked;
bilking.


blank (v.)

1540s, to nonplus, disconcert, shut up; 1560s, to frustrate, from blank (adj.). Sports sense of
defeat (another team) without allowing a score is from 1870. Meaning to become blank or empty is
from 1955. Related: Blanked; blanking.


catch-up (n.)

a working to overtake a leading rival, by 1971, probably a figurative use from U.S. football in
reference to being behind in the score. From verbal phrase catch up, which was used from early 14c.
in sense raise aloft and from 1855 in sense overtake; see catch (v.) + up (adv.).


yours (pron.)

absolutive form of your, c.1300, on model of his, ours, etc. Yours truly myself is from 1833, from
the common subscription of letters.    It is difficult to say what will succeed, and still more to
pronounce what will not. I am at this moment in that uncertainty (on our own score,) and it is no
small proof of the author's powers to be able to charm and fix a mind's attention on similar
subjects and climates in such a predicament. That he may have the same effect upon all his readers
is very sincerely the wish, and hardly the doubt, of yours truly,  B.  [Lord Byron to John Murray,
Dec. 4, 1813]


outscore (v.)

1921, from out (adv.) + score (v.). Related: Outscored; outscoring.


bust (v.)

to burst, 1806, variant of burst (v.); for loss of -r-, compare ass (n.2). Meaning go bankrupt is
from 1834. Meaning break into is from 1859. The slang meaning demote (especially in a military
sense) is from 1918; that of place under arrest is from 1953 (earlier to raid from Prohibition). In
card games, to go over a score of 21, from 1939. Related: Busted; busting.


LP

1948, abbreviation of long-playing phonograph record.    The most revolutionary development to hit
the recording industry since the invention of the automatic changer is the Long Playing record,
which can hold an entire 45-minute symphony or musical-comedy score on a single 12-inch disk. ...
The disks, released a few weeks ago by Columbia Records and made of Vinylite, have phenomenally
narrow grooves (.003 of an inch). They are played at less than half the speed of the standard old-
style records. [Life magazine, July 26, 1948]


sharpen (v.)

1520s, bring to an edge or point, from sharp (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Sharpened; sharpening. Old
English verb scearpian meant to score, scarify; also compare scearpung scarifying. To sharpen
(one's) pencil prepare to get to work is from 1957, American English.


scarify (v.)

mid-15c., make incisions in the bark of a tree, from Middle French scarifier score, scrape (leather
or hide), 14c., from Late Latin scarificare (see scarification). The sense cover with scars (1680s)
is a sense-shift from influence of scar (v.). Related: Scarified; scarifier; scarifying.


tally (v.)

mid-15c., keep an account by tally, from Medieval Latin talliare to tax, from tallia (see tally
(n.)). Meaning correspond, agree is from 1705; sports sense of to score is from 1867. Related:
Tallied; tallying. Hence tally-sheet (1889); tallyman one who keeps account (of anything) (1857).


chalk (v.)

1570s, to mix with chalk; 1590s as to mark with chalk, from chalk (n.). Related: Chalked; chalking.
Old English had cealcian to whiten. Certain chalk marks on shipped objects meant admitted or shipped
free, hence some figurative senses. Chalk boards also were commonly used in keeping credit, score,
etc., hence figurative use of chalk it up (1903).


shutout (n.)

also shut-out, 1889 in baseball sense, from verbal phrase shut out exclude from a situation (late
14c.; from 1881 in the sports score sense), from shut (v.) + out (adv.). Middle English had a verb
outshut to shut out, exclude, mid-15c.


eagle (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French egle, from Old Proven&ccedil;al aigla, from Latin aquila black eagle, fem.
of aquilus, often explained as dark colored (bird); see aquiline. The native term was erne. Golf
score sense is first recorded by 1908 (according to old golf sources, because it soars higher than a
birdie). The figurative eagle-eyed is attested from c.1600.


scotch (v.)

stamp out, crush, 1825, earlier make harmless for a time (1798; a sense that derives from an
uncertain reading of Macbeth III.ii.13), from scocchen to cut, score, gash, make an incision (early
15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from Anglo-French escocher, Old French cocher to notch,
nick, from coche a notch, groove, perhaps from Latin coccum berry of the scarlet oak, which appears
notched, from Greek kokkos. Related: Scotched; scotching.


rack (v.)

to stretch out for drying, also to torture on the rack, early 15c., from rack (n.1). Of other pains
from 1580s. Figurative sense of to torment is from c.1600. Meaning raise above a fair level (of
rent, etc.) is from 1550s. Meaning fit with racks is from 1580s. Teenager slang meaning to sleep is
from 1960s (rack (n.) was Navy slang for bed in 1940s). Related: Racked; racking. Rack up register,
accumulate, achieve is first attested 1943 (in Billboard), probably from method of keeping score in
pool halls.


scar (n.)

late 14c., from Old French escare scab (Modern French escarre), from Late Latin eschara, from Greek
eskhara scab formed after a burn, literally hearth, fireplace, of unknown origin. English sense
probably influenced by Middle English skar (late 14c.) crack, cut, incision, from Old Norse
skar&eth;, related to score (n.). Figurative sense attested from 1580s.


goal (n.)

1530s, end point of a race, of uncertain origin. The noun gol appears once before this, in a poem
from early 14c. and with an apparent sense of boundary, limit. Perhaps from Old English *gal
obstacle, barrier, a word implied by g&aelig;lan to hinder and also found in compounds (singal,
widgal); and compare Old Norse geil a narrow glen, a passage. Or from Old French gaule a pole, from
Germanic; or a figurative use of Middle English gale a way, course (mid-14c.) Sports sense of place
where the ball is put to score is attested from 1540s. Figurative sense of object of an effort is
from 1540s.


advantage (n.)

early 14c., avantage, position of being in advance of another, from Old French avantage advantage,
profit, superiority, from avant before, probably via an unrecorded Late Latin *abantaticum, from
Latin abante (see advance).    The -d- is a 16c. intrusion on the analogy of Latin ad- words.
Meaning a favoring circumstance (the opposite of disadvantage) is from late 15c. Tennis score sense
is from 1640s, first recorded in writings of John Milton, of all people. Phrase to take advantage of
is first attested late 14c.


century (n.)

1530s, one hundred (of anything), from Latin centuria group of one hundred of things of one kind
(including a measure of land and a division of the Roman army, one-sixteenth of a legion, headed by
a centurion), from centum hundred (see hundred) on analogy of decuria a company of ten.    Used in
Middle English from late 14c. as a division of land, from Roman use. The Modern English meaning is
attested from 1650s, short for century of years (1620s). The older, general sense is preserved in
the meaning score of 100 points in cricket and some other sports. Related: Centurial.


chart (n.)

1570s, map for the use of navigators, from Middle French charte card, map, from Late Latin charta
paper, card, map (see card (n.1)).   Charte is the original form of the French word in all senses,
but after 14c. (perhaps by influence of Italian cognate carta), carte began to supplant it. English
used both carte and card 15c.-17c. for chart, map, and in 17c. chart could mean playing card, but
the words have gone their separate ways and chart has predominated since in the map sense. In the
music score sense from 1957.


deuce (n.)

late 15c., the 2 in dice or cards, also a roll of 2 in dice (1510s), from Middle French deus (Modern
French deux), from Latin duos (nominative duo) two (see two).    Became a mild oath by 1710, about
50 years after it was first attested in the sense of bad luck, the devil, etc., perhaps because two
was the lowest score, and probably by similarity to Latin deus and related words meaning god. Low
German had der daus! in same sense 16c., which perhaps influenced the English form. Deuce coupe is
1940s hot-rodder slang for souped up two-door car, especially a 1932 Ford. Related: Deuced;
deucedly.


safety (n.)

early 14c., from Old French sauvete safety, safeguard; salvation; security, surety, earlier salvetet
(11c., Modern French sauvet&#233;), from Medieval Latin salvitatem (nominative salvitas) safety,
from Latin salvus (see safe (adj.)). Meaning trigger-lock on a gun is attested from 1881.    As a
North American football position, first recorded 1931. As a type of score against one's own team,
1881. Safety-valve, which diminishes the risk of explosion, is from 1797; figurative sense recorded
from 1818. Safety-net in literal sense (in machinery) by 1916, later of aerial circus performances
(1920s); figurative use by 1950. Safety-first as an accident-prevention slogan first recorded 1873.


trace (v.)

late 14c., follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something, also figurative; ponder,
investigate, from Old French tracier look for, follow, pursue (12c., Modern French tracer), from
Vulgar Latin *tractiare delineate, score, trace (source also of Spanish trazar to trace, devise,
plan out, Italian tracciare to follow by foot), a frequentative form from Latin tractus track,
course, literally a drawing out, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract
(n.1)).    Meaning move along, pass over (a path, etc.) is attested from c.1400; that of track down,
follow the trail of is early 15c. Meaning copy a drawing on a transparent sheet laid over it is
recorded from 1762. Related: Traced; tracing.


prolicide (n.)

killing of one's child or children, 1824, introduced by Dr. John Gordon Smith in the 2nd edition of
his Principles of Forensic Medicine; from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + -cide.    It is
hoped that this word will be considered entitled to reception, on the score of analogy. We have long
had parricide, fratricide, and infanticide, all (if I may use the figure of speech,) of the same
family; and recently the very appropriate term foeticide has been introduced into Forensic Medicine.
In both these last crimes there is a peculiarity arising from the person accused being, in almost
every instance, the parent .... In this relation to the beings destroyed, the general term of
murderer, or murder of offspring seems to be the fair converse of parricide; and will suit well the
purpose of the Medico-legal writer, who considers the two cases as parts of one subject, for the
designation of which collectively a proper term was wanting. [Smith]


write (v.)

Old English writan to score, outline, draw the figure of, later to set down in writing (class I
strong verb; past tense wrat, past participle writen), from Proto-Germanic *writan tear, scratch
(cognates: Old Frisian writa to write, Old Saxon writan to tear, scratch, write, Old Norse rita
write, scratch, outline, Old High German rizan to write, scratch, tear, German rei&szlig;en to tear,
pull, tug, sketch, draw, design), outside connections doubtful.  For men use to write an evill turne
in marble stone, but a good turne in the dust. [More, 1513]    Words for write in most Indo-European
languages originally mean carve, scratch, cut (such as Latin scribere, Greek grapho, Sanskrit
rikh-); a few originally meant paint (Gothic meljan, Old Church Slavonic pisati, and most of the
modern Slavic cognates). To write (something) off (1680s) originally was from accounting; figurative
sense is recorded from 1889. Write-in unlisted candidate is recorded from 1932.


meld (v.)

to blend together, merge, unite (intransitive), by 1910, of uncertain origin. OED suggests perh. a
blend of MELT v.1 and WELD v. Said elsewhere to be a verb use of melled mingled, blended, past
participle of dialectal mell to mingle, mix, combine, blend.    [T]he biplane grew smaller and
smaller, the stacatto clatter of the motor became once more a drone which imperceptibly became
melded with the waning murmur of country sounds .... [Aircraft magazine, October 1910]      But it
is perhaps an image from card-playing, where the verb meld is attested by 1907 in a sense of combine
two cards for a score:    Upon winning a trick, and before drawing from the stock, the player can
meld certain combinations of cards. [rules for two-hand pinochle in Hoyle's Games, 1907]    The rise
of the general sense of the word in English coincides with the craze for canasta, in which melding
figures. The card-playing sense is said to be apparently from German melden make known, announce,
from Old High German meldon, from Proto-Germanic *meldojan (source of Old English meldian to
declare, tell, display, proclaim), and the notion is of declaring the combination of cards. Related:
Melded; melding.


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


love (n.)

Old English lufu love, affection, friendliness, from Proto-Germanic *lubo (cognates: Old High German
liubi joy, German Liebe love; Old Norse, Old Frisian, Dutch lof; German Lob praise; Old Saxon liof,
Old Frisian liaf, Dutch lief, Old High German liob, German lieb, Gothic liufs dear, beloved).    The
Germanic words are from PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love (cognates: Latin lubet, later libet
pleases; Sanskrit lubhyati desires; Old Church Slavonic l'ubu dear, beloved; Lithuanian liaupse song
of praise).    Even now, she thought, almost no one remembers Esteban and Pepita but myself. Camilla
alone remembers her Uncle Pio and her son; this woman, her mother. But soon we shall die and all
memory of those five will have left the earth, and we ourselves shall be loved for a while and
forgotten. But the love will have been enough; all those impulses of love return the love that made
them. Even memory is not necessary for love. There is a land of the living and a land of the dead
and the bridge is love, the only survival, the only meaning. [Thornton Wilder, Bridge of San Luis
Rey, 1927]    Meaning a beloved person is from early 13c. The sense no score (in tennis, etc.) is
1742, from the notion of playing for love, i.e. for nothing (1670s). Phrase for love or money for
anything is attested from 1580s. Love seat is from 1904. Love-letter is attested from mid-13c.;
love-song from early 14c. To fall in love is attested from early 15c. To be in love with (someone)
is from c.1500. To make love is from 1570s in the sense pay amorous attention to; as a euphemism for
have sex, it is attested from c.1950. Love life one's collective amorous activities is from 1919,
originally a term in psychological jargon. Love affair is from 1590s. The phrase no love lost
(between two people) is ambiguous and was used 17c. in reference to two who love each other well
(c.1640) as well as two who have no love for each other (1620s).


kaput (adj.)

finished, worn out, dead, 1895, from German kaputt destroyed, ruined, lost (1640s), which in this
sense probably is a misunderstanding of the phrase capot machen, a partial translation of French
faire capot, a phrase which meant to win all the tricks (from the other player) in piquet, an
obsolete card game. Literally to make a bonnet; perhaps the notion is throwing a hood over the other
player, but faire capot also meant in French marine jargon to overset in a squall when under sail.
The word was popularized in English during World War I.   Kaput -- a slang word in common use which
corresponds roughly to the English done in, the French fichu. Everything enemy was kaput in the
early days of German victories. [F. Britten Austin, According to Orders, New York, 1919]    French
capot is literally cover, bonnet, also the name of a type of greatcloak worn by sailors and soldiers
(see capote). The card-playing sense attested in German only from 1690s, but capot in the
(presumably) transferred sense of destroyed, ruined, lost is attested from 1640s. [see William
Jervis Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary (1575-1648), Berlin, de
Gruyter, 1976]. In Hoyle and other English gaming sources, faire capot is to win all the tricks, and
a different phrase, &ecirc;tre capot, to be a bonnet, is sometimes cited as the term for losing
them. The sense reversal in German might have come about because if someone wins all the tricks the
other player has to lose them, and the same word capot, when it entered English from French in the
mid-17c. meant to score a cabot against; to win all the tricks from.    There are others, says a
third, that have played with my Lady Lurewell at picquet besides my lord; I have capotted her myself
two or three times in an evening. [George Farquhar (1677-1707), Sir Harry Wildair]


