scorcher (n.)

very hot day, 1874, agent noun from scorch (v.). It also means or has meant stinging attack (1842),
pretty girl (1881), line drive in baseball (1900).


scorch (v.)

to burn superficially or slightly, but so as to change the color or injure the texture, early 14c.,
perhaps an alteration of scorrcnenn make dry, parch (c.1200), of obscure origin, perhaps from Old
Norse skorpna to be shriveled, cognate with Old English scrimman to shrink, dry up. Or perhaps from
Old French escorchier to strip off the skin, from Vulgar Latin excorticare to flay, from ex- (see
ex-) + Latin cortex (genitive corticis) cork; but OED finds this not likely. Scorched earth military
strategy is 1937, translation of Chinese jiaotu, used against the Japanese in a bid to stem their
advance into China.


scald (v.)

c.1200, to be very hot; to afflict painfully with hot liquid or steam, from Old North French
escalder to scald, to scorch (Old French eschalder heat, boil up, bubble, Modern French
&eacute;chauder), from Late Latin excaldare bathe in hot water (source also of Spanish escaldar,
Italian scaldare heat with hot water), from Latin ex- off (see ex-) + calidus hot (see calorie).
Related: Scalded; scalding. The noun is c.1600, from the verb.


broil (v.1)

to cook, late 14c. (earlier to burn, mid-14c.), from Old French bruller to broil, roast (Modern
French br&#251;ler), earlier brusler to burn (11c.), which, with Italian bruciare, is of uncertain
and much-disputed origin.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *brodum broth, borrowed from Germanic and
ultimately related to brew (v.). Gamillscheg proposes it to be from Latin ustulare to scorch, singe
(from ustus, past participle of urere to burn) and altered by influence of Germanic burn words
beginning in br-. Related: Broiled; broiling.


bust (n.1)

1690s, sculpture of upper torso and head, from French buste (16c.), from Italian busto upper body,
from Latin bustum funeral monument, tomb, originally funeral pyre, place where corpses are burned,
perhaps shortened from ambustum, neuter of ambustus burned around, past participle of amburere burn
around, scorch, from ambi- around + urere to burn. Or perhaps from Old Latin boro, the early form of
classical Latin uro to burn. Sense development in Italian is probably from Etruscan custom of
keeping dead person's ashes in an urn shaped like the person when alive. Meaning bosom is by 1884.


flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


scathe (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse ska&eth;a to hurt, harm, damage, injure, from Proto-Germanic *skath-
(cognates: Old English scea&thorn;ian to hurt, injure, Old Saxon skathon, Old Frisian skethia,
Middle Dutch scaden, Dutch schaden, Old High German scadon, German schaden, Gothic sca&thorn;jan to
injure, damage), from PIE root *sket- to injure. Only cognate outside Germanic seems to be in Greek
a-skethes unharmed, unscathed.    It survives mostly in its negative form, unscathed, and in
figurative meaning sear with invective or satire (1852, usually as scathing) which developed from
the sense of scar, scorch used by Milton in Paradise Lost i.613 (1667).


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


