Scotch (adj.)

of Scotland, 1590s, contraction of Scottish. Disdained by the Scottish because of the many insulting
and pejorative formations made from it by the English (such as Scotch greys lice; Scotch attorney, a
Jamaica term from 1864 for strangler vines).   Scotch-Irish is from 1744 (adj.); 1789 (n.); more
properly Scots-Irish (1966), from Scots (mid-14c.), the older adjective, which is from Scottis, the
northern variant of Scottish. Scots (adj.) was used in Scottish until 18c., then Scotch became
vernacular, but in mid-19c. there was a reaction against it. Scotch Tape was said to be so called
because at first it had adhesive only on the edges (to make it easier to remove as a masking tape in
car paint jobs), which was interpreted as a sign of cheapness on the part of the manufacturers.


scotch (n.1)

1778, elliptical for Scotch whisky. See Scotch (adj.).


scotch (n.2)

incision, cut, score, gash, mid-15c., related to scotch (v.).


scotch (v.)

stamp out, crush, 1825, earlier make harmless for a time (1798; a sense that derives from an
uncertain reading of Macbeth III.ii.13), from scocchen to cut, score, gash, make an incision (early
15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from Anglo-French escocher, Old French cocher to notch,
nick, from coche a notch, groove, perhaps from Latin coccum berry of the scarlet oak, which appears
notched, from Greek kokkos. Related: Scotched; scotching.


Rob Roy (n.)

Highland freebooter (1671-1734). His name means Red Robert. As a type of cocktail made with Scotch
whiskey, it is attested from 1960.


Scottie

type of dog, 1907, short for Scotch terrier (1810).


Scots

see Scotch (adj.).


hopscotch

1801 (from 1789 as hop-scot), from hop (v.) + scotch (n.2) scratch, from the lines scored in the
dirt to make the squares for the game.


pizazz (n.)

also pizzaz; pizzazz, 1937, probably originally college or show-biz slang.Pizazz, to quote the
editor of the Harvard Lampoon, is an indefinable dynamic quality, the je ne sais quoi of function;
as for instance, adding Scotch puts pizazz into a drink. Certain clothes have it, too. [Harper's
Bazaar, March 1937]


warm (v.)

Old English wyrman make warm and wearmian become warm; from the root of warm (adj.). Phrase warm the
bench is sports jargon first recorded 1907. Related: Warmed; warming.    SCOTCH WARMING PAN. A
wench. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


mountain (n.)

c.1200, from Old French montaigne (Modern French montagne), from Vulgar Latin *montanea mountain,
mountain region, noun use of fem. of *montaneus of a mountain, mountainous, from Latin montanus
mountainous, of mountains, from mons (genitive montis) mountain (see mount (n.)).    Until 18c.,
applied to a fairly low elevation if it was prominent (such as Sussex Downs, the hills around
Paris). As an adjective from late 14c. Mountain dew raw and inferior whiskey first recorded 1839;
earlier a type of Scotch whiskey (1816); Jamieson's 1825 Supplement to his Scottish dictionary
defines it specifically as A cant term for Highland whisky that has paid no duty. Mountain-climber
recorded from 1839; mountain-climbing from 1836.


whiskey (n.)

1715, from Gaelic uisge beatha whisky, literally water of life, from Old Irish uisce water (from PIE
*ud-skio-, from root *wed- (1) water, wet; see water (n.1)) + bethu life (from PIE *gwi-wo-tut-,
suffixed form of *gwi-wo-, from root *gweie- (1) to live; see bio-).    According to Barnhart, the
Gaelic is probably a loan-translation of Medieval Latin aqua vitae, which had been applied to
intoxicating drinks since early 14c. (compare French eau de vie brandy). Other early spellings in
English include usquebea (1706) and iskie bae (1580s). In Ireland and Scotland obtained from malt;
in the U.S. commonly made from corn or rye. Spelling distinction between Scotch whisky and Irish and
American whiskey is a 19c. innovation. Whisky sour is recorded from 1889.


waltz (n.)

round dance performed to music in triple time, extraordinarily popular as a fashionable dance from
late 18c. to late 19c., the dance itself probably of Bohemian origin, 1781, from German Waltzer,
from walzen to roll, dance, from Old High German walzan to turn, roll, from Proto-Germanic *walt-
(cognate with Old Norse velta), from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see volvox). Described in
1825 as a riotous and indecent German dance [Walter Hamilton, A Hand-Book or Concise Dictionary of
Terms Used in the Arts and Sciences].    The music struck up a beautiful air, and the dancers
advanced a few steps, when suddenly, to my no small horror and amazement, the gentlemen seized the
ladies round the waist, and all, as if intoxicated by this novel juxtaposition, began to whirl about
the room, like a company of Bacchanalians dancing round a statue of the jolly god. A waltz!
exclaimed I, inexpressibly shocked, have I lived to see Scotch women waltz? [The Edinburgh Magazine,
April, 1820]


nostalgia (n.)

1770, severe homesickness considered as a disease, Modern Latin, coined 1668 in a dissertation on
the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German
heimweh (for which see home + woe). From Greek algos pain, grief, distress (see -algia) + nostos
homecoming, from PIE *nes- to return safely home (cognate with Old Norse nest food for a journey,
Sanskrit nasate approaches, joins, German genesen to recover, Gothic ganisan to heal, Old English
genesen to recover). French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754.    Originally in
reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or
in combination with wounds or disease. By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that
of sailors, convicts, African slaves. The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch
regiments while serving abroad [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the endemic
diseases in the Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which
defines it as The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent
from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and
friends and the scenes their youth .... It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was
considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:    In the first two
years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These
numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of
the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many
cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. [Sanitary Memoirs of the War, U.S. Sanitary
Commission, N.Y.: 1867]    Transferred sense (the main modern one) of wistful yearning for the past
first recorded 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a
distant place also necessarily involves a separation in time.


