scourge (v.)

c.1300, to whip, from Old French escorgier and from scourge (n.). Figurative meaning to afflict
(often for the sake of punishment or purification) is from late 14c. Related: Scourged; scourging.


scourge (n.)

c.1200, a whip, lash, from Anglo-French escorge, back-formation from Old French escorgier to whip,
from Vulgar Latin *excorrigiare, from Latin ex- out, off (see ex-) + corrigia thong, shoelace, in
this case whip, probably from a Gaulish word related to Old Irish cuimrech fetter, from PIE root
*reig- to bind (see rig (v.)). Figurative use from late 14c. Scourge of God, title given by later
generations to Attila the Hun (406-453 C.E.), is attested from late 14c., from Latin flagellum Dei.


flagellant (n.)

late 16c., from Latin flagellantem (nominative flagellans), present participle of flagellare to
scourge, lash (see flagellum).


flail (v.)

15c., from flail (n.); originally to scourge; sense of to move like a flail is from 1874. Related:
Flailed; flailing.


flagellate (v.)

1620s, from Latin flagellatus, past participle of flagellare to scourge, lash (see flagellum).
Related: Flagellated; flagellating. An earlier verb for this was flagellen (mid-15c.).


flagellum (n.)

1852, in reference to microbes, from Latin flagellum whip, scourge, diminutive of flagrum whip, from
PIE root *bhlag- to strike.


flagitious (adj.)

shamefully wicked, criminal, late 14c., from Old French flagicieux or directly from Latin
flagitiosus shameful, disgraceful, infamous, from flagitium shameful act, passionate deed,
disgraceful thing, related to flagrum a whip, scourge, lash, flagitare to demand importunately, from
PIE root *bhlag- to strike. Related: Flagitiously; flagitiousness.


swingle (n.)

instrument for beating flax, early 14c., from Middle Dutch swinghel swingle for flax, cognate with
Old English swingell beating, stick to beat, whip, scourge, rod, from swingan to beat, strike, whip
(see swing (v.)) + instrumental suffix -le. Or perhaps directly from the Old English word, with
narrowing of sense.


swing (v.)

Old English swingan beat, strike; scourge, flog; to rush, fling oneself (strong verb, past tense
swang, past participle swungen), from Proto-Germanic *swingan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
swingan, Old Frisian swinga, German schwingen to swing, swingle, oscillate), from PIE *sweng(w)- to
swing, turn, toss (perhaps Germanic only).    The meaning move freely back and forth is first
recorded 1540s. Transitive sense cause to oscillate is from 1550s. Sense of bring about, make happen
is from 1934. Sense of engage in promiscuous sex is from 1964; earlier, more generally, enjoy
oneself unconventionally (1957). Related: Swung; swinging. Swing-voter independent who often
determines the outcome of an election is from 1966.


plague (n.)

late 14c., plage, affliction, calamity, evil, scourge; early 15c., malignant disease, from Old
French plage (14c.), from Late Latin plaga, used in Vulgate for pestilence, from Latin plaga stroke,
wound, probably from root of plangere to strike, lament (by beating the breast), from or cognate
with Greek (Doric) plaga blow, from PIE *plak- (2) to strike, to hit (cognates: Greek plazein to
drive away, plessein to beat, strike; Old English flocan to strike, beat; Gothic flokan to bewail;
German fluchen, Old Frisian floka to curse).    The Latin word also is the source of Old Irish plag
(genitive plaige) plague, pestilence, German Plage, Dutch plaage. Meaning epidemic that causes many
deaths is from 1540s; specifically in reference to bubonic plague from c.1600. Modern spelling
follows French, which had plague from 15c. Weakened sense of anything annoying is from c.1600.


