screech (n.)

1550s, from screech (v.). Earlier scritch (1510s).


screech (v.)

1570s, alteration of scritch (mid-13c., schrichen), possibly of imitative origin (compare shriek).
Related: Screeched; screeching. Screech-owl is attested from 1590s (scritch-owl is from 1520s).


shriek (v.)

16c. variant of scrycke (c.1200), from Old Norse skr&aelig;kja to screech (see screech), probably of
imitative origin. Related: Shrieked; shrieking. The noun is attested from 1580s, from the verb.


scritch

see screech.


strident (adj.)

1650s, from French strident (16c.) and directly from Latin stridentem (nominative stridens), present
participle of stridere utter an inarticulate sound, grate, screech, from PIE *(s)trei-, possibly of
imitative origin (cognates: Greek trismos a grinding, scream). Related: Stridently; stridence;
stridency.


kite (n.)

bird of prey (Milvus ictinus), Old English cyta kind of hawk, probably imitative of its cries
(compare ciegan to call, German Kauz screech owl). The toy kite first so-called 1660s, from its way
of hovering in the air like a bird. The dismissive invitation to go fly a kite is attested by 1942,
American English, probably tracing to the popular song of the same name (lyrics by Johnny Burke),
sung by Bing Crosby in The Star Maker (1939):    Go fly a kite and tie your troubles to the tail
They'll be blown away by a merry gale,   Go fly a kite and toss your worries to the wind   And they
won't come back, they'll be too chagrined.


lamia (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lamia, from Greek lamia female vampire, literally swallower, lecher, from
laimos throat, gullet. Probably cognate with Latin lemures spirits of the dead (see lemur). Used in
early translations of the Bible for screech owls and sea monsters. Sometimes also, apparently,
mermaids.    Also kynde erre&thorn; in som beestes wondirliche j-schape, as it fare&thorn; in a
beest &thorn;at hatte lamia, &thorn;at ha&thorn; an heed as a mayde &amp; body as a grym fissche[;]
whan &thorn;at best lamya may fynde ony man, first a flatere&thorn; wi&thorn; hym with a wommannes
face and make&thorn; hym ligge by here while he may dure, &amp; whanne he may nofer&thorn;ere
suffice to here lecherye &thorn;anne he rende&thorn; hym and sle&thorn; and ete&thorn; hym. [John of
Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


