scrutinize (v.)

1670s, from scrutiny + -ize. Related: Scrutinized; scrutinizing. Earlier verb was scrutine (1590s),
from French.


scrutinization (n.)

1772, noun of action from scrutinize.


scrutinise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of scrutinize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related: Scrutinised;
scrutinising; scrutinisation.


overlook (v.)

mid-14c., to examine, scrutinize, inspect, from over- + look (v.). Another Middle English sense was
to peer over the top of. These two literal senses have given rise to the two main modern meanings.
Meaning to look over or beyond and thus not see, via notion of to choose to not notice is first
recorded 1520s. Seemingly contradictory sense of to watch over officially, keep an eye on,
superintend is from 1530s. Related: Overlooked; overlooking. In Shekaspeare's day, overlooking also
was a common term for inflicting the evil eye on (someone or something).


understand (v.)

Old English understandan comprehend, grasp the idea of, probably literally stand in the midst of,
from under + standan to stand (see stand (v.)). If this is the meaning, the under is not the usual
word meaning beneath, but from Old English under, from PIE *nter- between, among (cognates: Sanskrit
antar among, between, Latin inter between, among, Greek entera intestines; see inter-). Related:
Understood; understanding   That is the suggestion in Barnhart, but other sources regard the among,
between, before, in the presence of sense of Old English prefix and preposition under as other
meanings of the same word. Among seems to be the sense in many Old English compounds that resemble
understand, such as underniman to receive, undersecan examine, investigate, scrutinize (literally
underseek), under&eth;encan consider, change one's mind, underginnan to begin. It also seems to be
the sense still in expressions such as under such circumstances.    Perhaps the ultimate sense is be
close to; compare Greek epistamai I know how, I know, literally I stand upon. Similar formations are
found in Old Frisian (understonda), Middle Danish (understande), while other Germanic languages use
compounds meaning stand before (German verstehen, represented in Old English by forstanden). For
this concept, most Indo-European languages use figurative extensions of compounds that literally
mean put together, or separate, or take, grasp (see comprehend). Old English oferstandan, Middle
English overstonden, literally over-stand seem to have been used only in literal senses. For to
stand under in a physical sense, Old English had undergestandan.


