scurvy (n.)

1560s, noun use of adjective scurvy covered with scabs, diseased, scorbutic (early 15c.), variant of
scurfy. It took on the narrower meaning of Dutch scheurbuik, French scorbut scurvy, in reference to
the disease characterized by swollen and bleeding gums, prostration, etc., perhaps from Old Norse
skyrbjugr, which is perhaps literally a swelling (bjugr) from drinking sour milk (skyr) on long sea
voyages; but OED has alternative etymology of Middle Dutch or Middle Low German origin, as disease
that lacerates the belly, from schoren to lacerate + Middle Low German buk, Dutch buik belly.


scorbutic (adj.)

1650s, from Modern Latin scorbuticus pertaining to scurvy, from scorbutus scurvy, from French
scorbut, apparently of Dutch (scheurbuik) or Low German (Scharbock) origin; see scurvy. Scorbute
scurvy is attested from 1590s, from French.


ascorbic (adj.)

1933 (in ascorbic acid), from a- (2) + scorb(ut)ic of scurvy (from Medieval Latin scorbuticus
scurvy); originally in reference to Vitamin C, which is an anti-scorbutic. The Latin word is perhaps
of German or Dutch origin.


whoreson (n.)

c.1300, from whore (n.) + son. Often used affectionately, it translates Anglo-French fiz a putain.
As an adjective, mean, scurvy, contemptuous, from mid-15c.


scurfy (adj.)

late 15c., from scurf + -y (2). Compare scurvy. Related: Scurfiness.


antiscorbutic (n.)

also anti-scorbutic, 1690s, from anti- + Modern Latin scorbutus scurvy (see scorbutic). From 1725 as
an adjective.


limey (n.)

1888, Australian, New Zealand, and South African slang for English immigrant; U.S. use is attested
from 1918, originally British sailor, British warship, short for lime-juicer (1857), in derisive
reference to the British Navy's policy (begun 1795) of issuing lime (n.2) juice on ships to prevent
scurvy among sailors. In U.S., extended to any Englishman by 1924.Midway Signs Limey Prof to Dope
Yank Talk [Chicago Tribune headline, Oct. 18, 1924]


psoriasis (n.)

1680s, from medical Latin psoriasis, in Late Latin mange, scurvy, from Greek psoriasis being itchy,
from psorian to have the itch, from psora itch, mange, scab, related to psen to rub (see psilo-).
Related: Psoriatic.


orange (n.)

c.1300, of the fruit, from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval
Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), alteration of
Arabic naranj, from Persian narang, from Sanskrit naranga-s orange tree, of uncertain origin. Not
used as a color word until 1540s.    Loss of initial n- probably due to confusion with definite
article (as in une narange, una narancia), but perhaps influenced by French or gold. The name of the
town of Orange in France (see Orangemen) perhaps was deformed by the name of the fruit. Orange juice
is attested from 1723.    The tree's original range probably was northern India. The Persian orange,
grown widely in southern Europe after its introduction in Italy 11c., was bitter; sweet oranges were
brought to Europe 15c. from India by Portuguese traders and quickly displaced the bitter variety,
but only Modern Greek still seems to distinguish the bitter (nerantzi) from the sweet (portokali
Portuguese) orange. Portuguese, Spanish, Arab, and Dutch sailors planted citrus trees along trade
routes to prevent scurvy. On his second voyage in 1493, Christopher Columbus brought the seeds of
oranges, lemons and citrons to Haiti and the Caribbean. Introduced in Florida (along with lemons) in
1513 by Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de Leon. Introduced to Hawaii 1792.


