scuttlebutt (n.)

1805, cask of drinking water kept on a ship's deck, having a hole (scuttle) cut in it for a cup or
dipper, from scuttle opening in a ship's deck (see scuttle (v.2)) + butt (n.2) barrel. Earlier
scuttle cask (1777). Meaning rumor, gossip first recorded 1901, originally nautical slang,
traditionally said to be from the sailors' custom of gathering around the scuttlebutt to gossip.
Compare water-cooler, figurative for workplace gossip mid-20c.


scuttle (v.1)

scamper, scurry, mid-15c., probably related to scud (v.). Related: Scuttled; scuttling.    I should
have been a pair of ragged claws         Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.  [T.S. Eliot,
The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock]


scuttle (v.2)

cut a hole in a ship to sink it, 1640s, from skottell (n.) opening in a ship's deck (late 15c.),
from Middle French escoutille (Modern French &eacute;coutille) or directly from Spanish escotilla
hatchway, diminutive of escota opening in a garment, from escotar cut out, perhaps from e- out (see
ex-) + Germanic *skaut-. Figurative use is recorded from 1888. Related: Scuttled; scuttling.


scuttle (n.)

bucket, late Old English scutel dish, platter, from Latin scutella serving platter (source also of
French &#233;cuelle, Spanish escudilla, Italian scudella a plate, bowl), diminutive of scutra flat
tray, dish, perhaps related to scutum shield (see hide (n.1)).    A common Germanic borrowing from
Latin (Old Norse skutill, Middle Dutch schotel, Old High German scuzzila, German Sch&uuml;ssel a
dish). Meaning basket for sifting grain is attested from mid-14c.; sense of bucket for holding coal
first recorded 1849.


scullery (n.)

mid-15c. (early 14c. as a surname), household department concerned with the care of kitchen
utensils, from Old French escuelerie office of the servant in charge of plates, etc., from escuelier
keeper of the dishes, from escuele dish (12c., Modern French &#233;cuelle), from Latin scutella
serving platter, silver (see scuttle (n.)).


skillet (n.)

c.1400, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Middle French esculette a little dish (Modern French
&eacute;cuelle), diminutive of escuele plate, from Latin scutella serving platter (see scuttle
(n.)); or formed in English from skele wooden bucket or pail (early 14c.), from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse skjola pail, bucket.


