season (v.)

improve the flavor of by adding spices, c.1300, from Old French assaisoner to ripen, season, from a-
to (see ad-) + root of season (n.) on the notion of fruit becoming more palatable as it ripens.
Applied to timber by 1540s. In 16c., it also meant to copulate with.


season (n.)

c.1300, a period of the year, with reference to weather or work, also proper time, suitable
occasion, from Old French seison, saison season, date; right moment, appropriate time (Modern French
saison) a sowing, planting, from Latin sationem (nominative satio) a sowing, planting, noun of
action from past participle stem of serere to sow (see sow (v.)).    Sense shifted in Vulgar Latin
from act of sowing to time of sowing, especially spring, regarded as the chief sowing season. In Old
Proven&#231;al and Old French (and thus in English), this was extended to season in general. In
other Indo-European languages, generic season (of the year) words typically are from words for time,
sometimes with a word for year (as in Latin tempus (anni), German Jahrzeit). Of game (as in out of
season) from late 14c. Spanish estacion, Italian stagione are unrelated, being from Latin statio
station.    Meaning time of year during which a place is most frequented is from 1705. Season ticket
is attested from 1820.


seasonal (adj.)

pertaining to the seasons; relating to a season, 1829, from season (n.) + -al (1). Of workers or
employment, from 1904. Related: Seasonally.


seasonable (adj.)

suitable as to the time or season, late 14c., from season (n.) + -able. Related: Seasonably;
seasonableness.


seasoned (adj.)

mid-15c., flavored, spiced, past participle adjective from season (v.). Meaning fit for use is from
1540s; that of acclimatized, accustomed is from 1640s.


seasoning (n.)

act of adding flavor, 1510s; something added to a dish to impart flavor, 1570s, verbal noun from
season (v.).


off-season (n.)

1848, a period when business is down, from off (adv.) + season (n.).


monsoon (n.)

1580s, trade wind of the Indian Ocean, from Dutch monssoen, from Portuguese mon&ccedil;ao, from
Arabic mawsim time of year, appropriate season (for a voyage, pilgrimage, etc.), from wasama he
marked. When it blows from the southwest (April through October) it brings heavy rain, hence heavy
episode of rainfall during the rainy season (1747).


hour (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French hore one-twelfth of a day (sunrise to sunset), from Latin hora hour, time,
season, from Greek hora any limited time, from PIE *yor-a-, from root *yer- year, season (see year).
Greek hora was a season; 'the season;' in classical times, sometimes, a part of the day, such as
morning, evening, noon, night.    The Greek astronomers apparently borrowed the notion of dividing
the day into twelve parts (mentioned in Herodotus) from the Babylonians (night continued to be
divided into four watches), but as the amount of daylight changed throughout the year, the hours
were not fixed or of equal length. Equinoctal hours did not become established in Europe until the
4c., and as late as 16c. distinction sometimes was made between temporary (unequal) hours and
sidereal (equal) ones. The h- has persisted in this word despite not being pronounced since Roman
times. Replaced Old English tid, literally time (see tide (n.)) and stund period of time, point of
time, hour (compare German Stunde hour), As a measure of distance (the distance that can be covered
in an hour) it is recorded from 1785.


tempest (n.)

violent storm, late 13c., from Old French tempeste storm; commotion, battle; epidemic, plague
(11c.), from Vulgar Latin *tempesta, from Latin tempestas a storm; weather, season, time, point in
time, season, period, also commotion, disturbance, related to tempus time, season (see temporal).
Sense evolution is from period of time to period of weather, to bad weather to storm. Words for
weather originally were words for time in languages from Russia to Brittany. Figurative sense of
violent commotion in English is recorded from early 14c. Tempest in a teapot attested from 1818; the
image in other forms is older, such as storm in a creambowl (1670s).


temporal (adj.)

late 14c., worldly, secular; also terrestrial, earthly; temporary, lasting only for a time, from Old
French temporal earthly, and directly from from Latin temporalis of a time, but for a time,
temporary, from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season, proper time or season, of unknown origin.
Related: Temporally.


tidy (adj.)

mid-13c., in good condition, healthy, probably originally in season, timely, opportune, excellent
(though this sense is not attested until mid-14c.), from tide (n.) in the sense of season, time + -y
(2). Of persons, of neat and orderly habits, from 1706. Similar formation in Old High German zitig,
German zeitig, Dutch tijdig, Danish tidig timely, Old English tidlic temporal, also timely,
seasonable.


autumn (n.)

late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin
autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus increase), of unknown origin. Perhaps from
Etruscan, but Tucker suggests a meaning drying-up season and a root in *auq- (which would suggest
the form in -c- was the original) and compares archaic English sere-month August.   Harvest was the
English name for the season until autumn began to displace it 16c. In Britain, the season is
popularly August through October; in U.S., September through November. Compare Italian autunno,
Spanish oto&ntilde;o, Portuguese outono, all from the Latin word. Unlike the other three seasons,
its names across the Indo-European languages leave no evidence that there ever was a common word for
it.    Many autumn words mean end, end of summer, or harvest. Compare also Lithuanian ruduo autumn,
from rudas reddish, in reference to leaves; Old Irish fogamar, literally under-winter.


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


temper (v.)

late Old English temprian to moderate, bring to a proper or suitable state, to modify some excessive
quality, to restrain within due limits, from Latin temperare observe proper measure, be moderate,
restrain oneself, also transitive, mix correctly, mix in due proportion; regulate, rule, govern,
manage, usually described as from tempus time, season (see temporal), with a sense of proper time or
season. Meaning to make (steel) hard and elastic is from late 14c. Sense of to tune the pitch of a
musical instrument is recorded from c.1300. Related: Tempered; tempering.


year (n.)

Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) year, from Proto-Germanic *jeram year (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr,
Gothic jer year), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- year, season (cognates: Avestan yare (nominative
singular) year; Greek hora year, season, any part of a year, also any part of a day, hour; Old
Church Slavonic jaru, Bohemian jaro spring; Latin hornus of this year; Old Persian du&#353;iyaram
famine, literally bad year). Probably originally that which makes [a complete cycle], and from
verbal root *ei- meaning to do, make.


winter (n.)

Old English winter (plural wintru), the fourth and coldest season of the year, winter, from Proto-
Germanic *wintruz winter (cognates: Old Frisian, Dutch winter, Old Saxon, Old High German wintar,
German winter, Danish and Swedish vinter, Gothic wintrus, Old Norse vetr winter), probably literally
the wet season, from PIE *wend-, from root *wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). On another old
guess, cognate with Gaulish vindo-, Old Irish find white.    As an adjective in Old English. The
Anglo-Saxons counted years in winters, as in Old English &aelig;netre one-year-old; and
wintercearig, which might mean either winter-sad or sad with years. Old Norse Vetrardag, first day
of winter, was the Saturday that fell between Oct. 10 and 16.


gast (adj.)

창&euro;&oelig;animal which does not produce in season,창&euro;? 1729, an East Anglian dialect word,
perhaps from Middle Dutch gast 창&euro;&oelig;barren soil.창&euro;?


summer (n.1)

hot season of the year, Old English sumor summer, from Proto-Germanic *sumur- (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Norse, Old High German sumar, Old Frisian sumur, Middle Dutch somer, Dutch zomer, German
Sommer), from PIE root *sem- (2) summer (cognates: Sanskrit sama season, half-year, Avestan hama in
summer, Armenian amarn summer, Old Irish sam, Old Welsh ham, Welsh haf summer).    As an adjective
from c.1300. Summer camp as an institution for youth is attested from 1886; summer resort is from
1823; summer school first recorded 1810; theatrical summer stock is attested from 1941 (see stock
(n.2)). Old Norse sumarsdag, first day of summer, was the Thursday that fell between April 9 and 15.


unseasoned (adj.)

1580s, not made palatable by seasoning, from un- (1) not + past participle of season (v.). Meaning
not habituated by experience is recorded from c.1600.


redfish (n.)

15c., of various species, especially originally the male salmon in spawning season; from red (adj.1)
+ fish (n.).


growing (adj.)

Old English, present participle adjective from grow (v.). Growing season is attested from 1729;
growing pains by 1752.


spice (v.)

to season with spices, early 14c. (implied in spiced), from spice (n.), or from Old French espicier,
from the French noun. Figurative sense of to vary, diversify is from 1520s.


sauce (v.)

mid-15c., to season, from sauce (n.). From 1862 as to speak impertinently. Related: Sauced; saucing.


laker (n.)

used of people or things associated in various ways with a lake or lakes, including tourists to the
English Lake country (1798); the poets (Wordsworth, etc.) who settled in that region (1814); boats
on the North American Great Lakes (1887), and a person whose work is on lakes (1838); see lake
(n.1). The U.S. professional basketball team began 1947 as the Minneapolis Lakers, where the name
was appropriate; before the 1960-1 season it moved to Los Angeles, but the name was kept.


chrono-

before vowels chron-, word-forming element meaning time, from Latinized form of Greek khrono-, comb.
form of khronos time, a defined time, a lifetime, a season, a while, which is of uncertain origin.


celebration (n.)

1520s, honoring of a day or season by appropriate festivities, formed in English from celebrate, or
else from Latin celebrationem (nominative celebratio) numerous attendance (especially upon a
festival celebration), noun of action from past participle stem of celebrare. Meaning performance of
a religious ceremony (especially the Eucharist) is from 1570s; that of extolling in speeches, etc.
is from 1670s.


tempo (n.)

relative speed of a piece of music, 1724, from Italian tempo, literally time (plural tempi), from
Latin tempus time, season, portion of time (see temporal). Extended (non-musical) senses by 1898.


haiku (n.)

1899, from Japanese, where it is singular of haikai, in haikai no renga jesting linked-verse;
originally a succession of haiku linked together into one poem. The form developed mid-16c.
Traditionally, there is mention of a season of the year somewhere in a haiku, as a means of
establishing the poem's tone, though this may be only the slightest suggestion. [Miller Williams,
Patterns of Poetry, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1986].


serotine (adj.)

late, 1590s, from French s&#233;rotine, from Latin serotinus that which comes late; that which
happens in the evening, from sero, adverb of serus late (see soiree). Also as a noun, a type of
small, brown bat, from 1771. Related: serotinous, in botany (1880) appearing later in the season
than usual.


brume (n.)

fog, mist, 1808, from French brume fog (14c.), in Old French, wintertime, from Latin bruma winter,
perhaps with an original sense season of the shortest day, from *brevima, contracted from
brevissima, superlative of brevis short (see brief (adj.)).


rut (n.2)

annually recurring sexual excitement in animals; animal mating season (originally of deer), early
15c., from Old French rut, ruit, from Late Latin rutigum (nominative rugitus) a bellowing, from past
participle of Latin rugire to bellow, from PIE imitative root *reu-. The verb is recorded from early
15c. Related: Rutting.


enchilada (n.)

1887, American English, from Mexican Spanish enchilada, fem. past participle of enchilar season with
chili, from en- in + chile chili (see chili).


condiment (n.)

early 15c., from Old French condiment (13c.), from Latin condimentum spice, seasoning, sauce, from
condire to preserve, pickle, season, variant of condere to put away, store, from com- together (see
com-) + -dere comb. form meaning to put, place, from dare to give (see date (n.1)).


temporary (adj.)

lasting only for a time, 1540s, from Latin temporarius of seasonal character, lasting a short time,
from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season (see temporal, late 14c., which was the earlier word
for lasting but for a time). The noun meaning person employed only for a time is recorded from 1848.
Related: Temporarily; temporariness.


Mardi Gras (n.)

1690s, from French, literally fat Tuesday, from mardi Tuesday (12c., from Latin Martis diem day of
the planet Mars; see Tuesday) + gras fat, from Latin crassus, thick. Day of eating and merrymaking
before the fasting season of Lent.


estivate (v.)

to spend the summer, mid-17c., from Latin aestivatus, past participle of aestivare to spend the
summer, from aestus heat, aestas summer, literally the hot season, from Proto-Italic *aissat-, from
PIE *aidh- to burn (see edifice). Related: Estivated; estivating.


kipper (n.)

Old English cypera male salmon, perhaps related to coper reddish-brown metal (see copper), on
resemblance of color. Another theory connects it to kip, name for the sharp, hooked lower jaw of the
male salmon in breeding season, from Middle English kippen to snatch, tug, pull. The modern word
usually refers to kippered herring, from a verb meaning to cure a fish by cleaning, salting, and
spicing it (early 14c.). The theory is that this originally was done to salmon, hence the name.


plover (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French plover, Old French pluvier, earlier plovier (c.1200), from Vulgar Latin
*plovarius, literally belonging to rain, from Latin pluvia rain (water) from pluere to rain, from
PIE root *pleu- to flow (see pluvial). Perhaps so called because the birds' migration arrival
coincides with the start of the rainy season, or from its supposed restlessness when rain
approaches.


advent (n.)

important arrival, 1742, an extended sense of  Advent season before Christmas (Old English), from
Latin adventus a coming, approach, arrival, in Church Latin the coming of the Savior, from past
participle stem of advenire arrive, come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come (see venue). In
English, also sometimes extended to the Pentecost.


commute (v.)

mid-15c., to change, transform, from Latin commutare to often change, to change altogether, from
com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + mutare to change (see mutable). Sense of make less severe is
1630s. Sense of go back and forth to work is 1889, from commutation ticket season pass (on a
railroad, streetcar line, etc.), from commute in its sense of to change one kind of payment into
another (1795), especially to combine a number of payments into a single one. Related: Commuted;
commuting.


Indian summer (n.)

spell of warm weather after the first frost,  first recorded 1778, American English, perhaps so
called because it was first noted in regions inhabited by Indians, or because the Indians first
described it to the Europeans. No evidence connects it with the color of fall leaves or a season of
Indian attacks on settlements. It is the American version of British All-Hallows summer, French
&eacute;t&eacute; de la Saint-Martin (feast day Nov. 11), etc. Also colloquial was St. Luke's summer
(or little summer), period of warm weather occurring about St. Luke's day (Oct. 18).


taupe (n.)

dark brownish-gray color (the color of moleskin), 1906, from French taupe, the color, originally a
mole, Old French, from Latin talpa a mole. The story below lacks evidence appears to be a fanciful
attempt to divert the origin of the color name to something more appealing:    Before the season
advances very far you will find that taupe, pronounced tope, will be the most favored color in the
entire category of shades and blendings. The original word is taken from the German word taube
pronounced tob-a, which is the name for the dove, but the French have twisted the b into a p and
give us taupe. [The Illustrated Milliner, August, 1906]


Noel (n.)

late 14c., nowel feast of Christmas, from Old French noel the Christmas season, variant of nael,
from Latin natalis (dies) birth (day), in Church Latin in reference to the birthday of Christ, from
natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus). The modern word in English,
with the sense a Christmas carol (1811) probably is a separate borrowing from French. As a masc.
proper name, from Old French, probably literally of or born on Christmas.


Met (n.)

1879 as colloquial shortening of Metropolitan (n.) member of the New York Metropolitan Base-Ball
Club.    THE baseball season has opened, and along with the twittering of the birds, the budding of
the trees, and the clattering of the truck, comes the news that the Mets were beaten yesterday 17 to
5. It is an infallible sign of spring when the Mets are beaten 17 to 5, and we invariably put on our
thinner clothing when we read that refreshing, though perennial news in the papers. [Life, May 12,
1887]    Used variously to abbreviate other proper names beginning with Metropolitan, such as
Metropolitan Museum of Art (N.Y.), by 1919; Metropolitan Railway (stock), by 1890; Metropolitan
Opera Company (N.Y.), by 1922. Related: Mets.


salmagundi (n.)

1670s, from French salmigondis (16c.), originally seasoned salt meats (compare French salmis salted
meats), from Middle French salmigondin (16c.), of uncertain origin; Watkins derives it from Latin
sal salt + condire to season, flavor. Probably related to or influenced by Old French salemine
hodgepodge of meats or fish cooked in wine, which was borrowed in Middle English as salomene (early
14c.). Figurative sense of mixture of various ingredients is from 1761; it was the title of
Washington Irving's satirical publication (1807-08). In dialect, salmon-gundy, solomon-gundy..


chimera (n.)

fabulous monster, late 14c., from Old French chimere or directly from Medieval Latin chimera, from
Latin Chimaera, from Greek khimaira, name of a mythical creature, slain by Bellerophon, with a
lion's head, a goat's body, and a serpent's tail (supposedly personification of snow or winter);
literally year-old she-goat (masc. khimaros), from kheima winter season (see hibernation).
Figurative meaning wild fantasy first recorded 1580s in English (attested 13c. in French).Beestis
clepid chymeres, that han a part of ech beest, and suche ben not, no but oonly in opynyoun. [Wyclif,
Prologue]


gossamer (n.)

c.1300, spider threads spun in fields of stubble in late fall, apparently from gos goose + sumer
summer (compare Swedish sommertrad summer thread). The reference might be to a fancied resemblance
of the silk to goose down, or because geese are in season then. The German equivalent
m&auml;dchensommer (literally girls' summer) also has a sense of Indian summer, and the English word
originally may have referred to a warm spell in autumn before being transferred to a phenomenon
especially noticable then. Compare obsolete Scottish go-summer period of summer-like weather in late
autumn. Meaning anything light or flimsy is from c.1400. The adjective sense filmy is attested from
1802.


Pleiades (n.)

late 14c., the seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, transformed by Zeus into seven stars, from
Latin Pleiades, from Greek Pleiades, perhaps literally constellation of the doves from a shortened
form of peleiades, plural of peleias dove (from PIE root *pel- dark-colored, gray). Or perhaps from
plein to sail, because the season of navigation begins with their heliacal rising.    Old English
had the name from Latin as Pliade. Mentioned by Hesiod (pre-700 B.C.E.), only six now are visible to
most people; on a clear night a good eye can see nine (in 1579, well before the invention of the
telescope, the German astronomer Michael Moestlin (1550-1631) correctly drew 11 Pleiades stars);
telescopes reveal at least 500. Hence French pleiade, used for a meeting or grouping of seven
persons.


campaign (n.)

1640s, operation of an army in the field, during a single season, in a particular region, or in a
definite enterprise; from French campagne campaign, literally open country, from Old French
champagne countryside, open country (suited to military maneuvers), from Late Latin campania level
country (source of Italian campagna, Spanish campa&ntilde;a, Portuguese campanha), from Latin campus
a field (see campus). Old armies spent winters in quarters and took to the open field to seek battle
in summer. Extension of meaning to political activity before an election, marked by organized action
in influencing the voters [DAE] is American English, 1809.


