seasonal (adj.)

pertaining to the seasons; relating to a season, 1829, from season (n.) + -al (1). Of workers or
employment, from 1904. Related: Seasonally.


wadi (n.)

watercourse, 1839, from Arabic wadi seasonal watercourse, prop. participle of wada it flowed. It
forms the Guadal- in Spanish river names.


layoff (n.)

also lay-off, lay off; 1889, rest, respite; from lay (v.) + off. Via seasonal labor with periodic
down time, it came to have a sense of temporary release from employment, and by 1960s was being used
somewhat euphemistically for permanent releases of masses of workers by employers. The verbal phrase
lay off is attested from 1868 as dismiss (an employee); meaning stop disturbing is from 1908.


temporary (adj.)

lasting only for a time, 1540s, from Latin temporarius of seasonal character, lasting a short time,
from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season (see temporal, late 14c., which was the earlier word
for lasting but for a time). The noun meaning person employed only for a time is recorded from 1848.
Related: Temporarily; temporariness.


ember days (n.)

Old English Ymbrendaeg, Ymbren, 12 days of the year (divided into four seasonal periods, hence Latin
name quatuor tempora) set aside by the Church for fasting and prayers, from Old English ymbren
recurring, corruption of ymbryne a circuit, revolution, course, anniversary, literally a running
around, from ymb round (cognate with Greek amphi, Latin ambo; see ambi-) + ryne course, running (see
run (n.)). Perhaps influenced by a corruption of the Latin name (compare German quatember).


harvest (n.)

Old English h&aelig;rfest autumn, period between August and November, from Proto-Germanic *harbitas
(cognates: Old Saxon hervist, Old Frisian and Dutch herfst, German Herbst autumn, Old Norse haust
harvest), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (cognates: Sanskrit krpana- sword, krpani
shears; Greek karpos fruit, karpizomai make harvest of; Latin carpere to cut, divide, pluck;
Lithuanian kerpu cut; Middle Irish cerbaim cut).    The borrowing of autumn and the use of fall in a
seasonal sense gradually focused the meaning of harvest to the time of gathering crops (mid-13c.),
then to the action itself and the product of the action (after c.1300). Figurative use by 1530s.
Harvest home (1590s) is the occasion of bringing home the last of the harvest; harvest moon (1706)
is that which is full within a fortnight of the autumnal equinox.


