secessionist (n.)

1860, first recorded in U.S. context, from secession + -ist (colloquial short form secesh, noun and
adjective, is attested from 1861); the earlier noun had been seceder, but this had religious
overtones, especially in reference to Scottish Church history.


secession (n.)

1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal,
insurrection, schism, noun of action from past participle stem of secedere secede, from se- apart
(see secret) + cedere to go (see cede). Originally in a Roman historical context, temporary
migration of plebeians from the city to compel patricians to address their grievances; modern use in
reference to religious or political unions dates from 1650s.


civil war (n.)

battles among fellow citizens or within a community, from civil in a sense of occurring among fellow
citizens attested from late 14c. in batayle ciuile civil battle, etc. The exact phrase civil war is
attested from late 15c. (the Latin phrase was bella civicus).    Early use typically was in
reference to ancient Rome. Later, in England, to the struggle between Parliament and Charles I
(1641-1651); in U.S., to the War of Secession (1861-1865), an application often decried as wholly
inaccurate but in use (among other names) in the North during the war and boosted by the use of the
term in the popular Battles and Leaders of the Civil War series published 1884-87 in Century
Magazine.    The war between the States, which a good many Southerners prefer, is both bookish and
inexact. Civil war is an utter misnomer. It was used and is still used by courteous people, the same
people who are careful to say Federal and Confederate. War of the rebellion, which begs the very
question at issue, has become the official designation of the struggle, but has found no acceptance
with the vanquished. To this day no Southerner uses it except by way of quotation .... The war of
secession is still used a good deal in foreign books, but it has no popular hold. The war, without
any further qualification, served the turn of Thucydides and Aristophanes for the Peloponnesian war.
It will serve ours, let it be hoped, for some time to come. [Basil L. Gildersleeve, The Creed of the
Old South, 1915]


secede (v.)

1702, to leave one's companions, from Latin secedere go away, withdraw, separate; rebel, revolt (see
secession). Sense of to withdraw from a political or religious alliance of union is recorded from
1755, originally especially in reference to the Church of Scotland. Related: Seceded; seceding;
seceder.


palmetto (n.)

1580s, from Spanish palmito dwarf fan palm tree, diminutive of palma palm tree, from Latin palma
(see palm (n.2)). The suffix was subsequently Italianized. The Palmetto Flag was an emblem of South
Carolina after secession (1860); the state was called Palmetto State from at least 1837.


union (n.)

early 15c., action of joining one thing to another, also agreement, accord, also state of matrimony,
from Anglo-French unioun, Old French union (12c.), from Late Latin unionem (nominative unio)
oneness, unity, a uniting, also in Latin meaning a single pearl or onion, from unus one, from PIE
*oi-no- one, unique (see one).    Sense of action of uniting into one political body is attested
from 1540s. Meaning group of people or states is from 1650s. Short for trade union, it is recorded
from 1833. U.S. political sense is attested from 1775; used especially during the Civil War, in
reference to the remainder of the United States after the Southern secession.


