sectary (n.)

member or adherent of a sect, 1550s, from French sectaire or directly from Medieval Latin sectarius,
from secta (see sect).


sect (n.)

mid-14c., distinctive system of beliefs or observances; party or school within a religion, from Old
French secte, sete sect, religious community, or directly from Late Latin secta religious group,
sect in philosophy or religion, from Latin secta manner, mode, following, school of thought,
literally a way, road, beaten path, from fem. of sectus, variant past participle of sequi follow,
from PIE *sekw- (1) to follow (see sequel). Confused in this sense with Latin secta, fem. past
participle of secare to cut (see section (n.)). Meaning separately organized religious body is
recorded from 1570s.


sectarian (adj.)

1640s, originally applied by Presbyterians to Independents, from Medieval Latin sectarius, from
secta (see sect).


Mennonite (n.)

member of an Anabaptist sect, 1560s, from name of Menno Simons (1492-1559), founder of the sect in
Friesland, + -ite (1). As an adjective by 1727. Alternative form Mennonist (n.) attested from 1640s.


Shia (n.)

also Shiah, 1620s, a collective name for one of the two great Muslim sects, from Arabic shi'ah
partisans, followers, sect, company, faction (from sha'a to follow). This is the proper use, but it
commonly is used in English to mean a Shiite. In Arabic, shi'ah is the name of the sect, shiya'iy is
a member of the sect.    The branch of Islam that recognizes Ali, Muhammad's son-in-law, as the
lawful successor of the Prophet; the minority who believed, after the death of the Prophet, that
spiritual and political authority followed his family line, as opposed to the Sunni, who took Abu
Bakr as the political leader of the community. The Arabic name is short for Shi'at Ali the party of
Ali.


Druse

member of a Muslim sect centered in Lebanon, 1786, from Arabic duruz, plural of darazi, from name of
the sect founder, Ismail ad-Darazi (11c.), literally Ismail the Tailor.


heresy (n.)

an opinion of private men different from that of the catholick and orthodox church [Johnson],
c.1200, from Old French heresie (12c.), from Latin h&aelig;resis, school of thought, philosophical
sect, used by Christian writers for unorthodox sect or doctrine, from Greek hairesis a taking or
choosing, a choice, from haireisthai take, seize, middle voice of hairein to choose, of unknown
origin, perhaps from PIE *ser- (5) to seize (cognates: Hittite &#353;aru booty, Welsh herw booty).
The Greek word was used in the New Testament in reference to the Sadducees, Pharisees, and even the
Christians, as sects of Judaism, but in English bibles it usually is translated sect. Meaning
religious belief opposed to the orthodox doctrines of the Church evolved in Late Latin. Transferred
(non-religious) use from late 14c.


Sadducee (n.)

Old English, from Late Latin Sadducaei (plural), from Greek Zaddoukaios, an inexact transliteration
of Hebrew tzedoqi, from personal name Tzadhoq Zadok (2 Sam. viii:17), the high priest from whom the
priesthood of the captivity claimed descent. According to Josephus, the sect denied the resurrection
of the dead and the existence of angels and spirits; but later historians regard them as more the
political party of the priestly class than a sect per se. Related: Sadducean.


Manichaeism (n.)

1550s, the religion of the Manichees (late 14c.) a Gnostic Christian sect named for its founder,
Mani (Latin Manich&aelig;us), c.215-275, Syriac-speaking apostle from a Jesus cult in Mesopotamia in
240s, who taught a universal religion. Vegetarian and visionary, they saw particles of light and
goodness trapped in evil matter and regarded Satan as co-eternal with God. The universe was a scene
of struggle between good and evil. The sect was characterized by dualism and a double-standard of
perfectionist elects and a larger group of fellow travelers who would require several reincarnations
before their particles of light would be liberated.


Sabian (n.)

an adherent of a religious sect mentioned thrice in the Qu'ran (in which they are classified with
Christians, and Jews as true believers worth of toleration by Muslims), 1610s, from Arabic, of
uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1748.    Perhaps the reference is to a Gnostic sect akin to
the later Mand&aelig;ans (if the word derives, as some think it does, from Arabic ch'bae to baptize,
Aramaic tzebha he dipped, dyed); but it has the appearance of derivation from the Semitic root of
Hebrew tzabha host (see Sabaoth), and as the Sabians were thought in the Middle Ages to have been
star-worshippers, it was interpreted as referring to the host of heaven. Related: Sabaism.


Muggletonian (n.)

1660s, member of the sect founded by English tailor Lodowicke Muggleton (1609-1698).


set (n.1)

collection of things, mid-15c., from Old French sette sequence, variant of secte religious
community, from Medieval Latin secta retinue, from Latin secta a following (see sect). [I]n
subsequent developments of meaning influenced by SET v.1 and apprehended as equivalent to 'number
set together' [OED]. The noun set was in Middle English, but only in the sense of religious sect
(late 14c.), which likely is the direct source of some modern meanings, such as group of persons
with shared status, habits, etc. (1680s).    Meaning complete collection of pieces is from 1680s.
Meaning group of pieces musicians perform at a club during 45 minutes (more or less) is from c.1925,
though it is found in a similar sense in 1580s. Set piece is from 1846 as grouping of people in a
work of visual art; from 1932 in reference to literary works.


Hutterite

1640s, in reference to Moravian Anabaptist sect established by Jacob Hutter (d.1536) + -ite (1).


seeker (n.)

early 14c., agent noun from seek.  The religious sect of the Seekers is attested from 1645.


Methodist (n.)

One of a new kind of puritans lately arisen, so called from their profession to live by rules and in
constant method [Johnson]. Protestant religious sect founded 1729 at Oxford University by John and
Charles Wesley, took that name almost from inception, but it had been used since at least 1686 for
various new methods of worship. Related: Methodism.


Schwenkfeldian

1560s, from Casper Schwenkfeld (1490-1561), Silesian Protestant mystic who founded the sect.
Schwenkfelder is attested from 1882.


Ebionite

1640s, sect (1c.-2c.) that held Jesus was a mere man and Christians continued bound by Mosaic Law,
from Latin ebonita, from Hebrew ebyon poor.


Lutheran

1521, from name of German religious reformer Martin Luther (1483-1546); used by Catholics 16c. in
reference to all Protestants, regardless of sect. Related: Lutheranism.


Maronite

1510s, from Late Latin Maronita, from Maron, name of the founder. A sect of Syrian Christians (4c.),
originally Monothelites, subsequently (1216) united with the Catholic Church.


Donatist (n.)

mid-15c., adherent of a Christian sect in 4c. North Africa, from Medieval Latin Donatista, from
Donatus name of two of the principal men in it. The schism had more to do with episcopal succession
in Carthage than with doctrine. The name is literally bestowed, given.


Marcionite (n.)

1540, early Christian sect, named for Gnostic Marcion of Sinope (c.140), who denied any connection
between the Old Testament and the New. They contrasted the barbaric and incompetent creator in the
Old Testament, who favored bandits and killers, with the higher god of Christ. They also emphasized
virginity and rejection of marriage. They flourished, especially in the East, until late 4c.


Amish (adj.)

1844, American English, from the name of Jacob Amman, 17c. Swiss Mennonite preacher who founded the
sect. Originally spelled Omish, which reflects the pronunciation in Pennsylvania German dialect. As
a noun, by 1884.


Shiite (n.)

1728, a member of the Shia sect of Islam, from Shia + -ite (1), Latin-derived suffix denoting
follower.


Moravian

1550s (n.); 1610s (adj.), from Moravia. From 1746, in reference to the Protestant sect founded in
the former German state of Moravia (now in Czech Republic). Related: Moravianism.


sept (n.)

1540s, enclosed area, from Latin septum (see septum). As division of a nation or tribe, 1510s, prob.
a var. of sect [OED].


Waldensian

c.1600, from Waldenses (plural), mid-15c., from Medieval Latin, apparently from Waldensis, a variant
form of the surname of Peter Waldo, the preacher who originated the sect c.1170 in southern France.
Excommunicated 1184, they eventually were swept into the Protestant revolt (16c.).


Seth

masc. proper name, Biblical third son of Adam, literally set, appointed, from Hebrew Sheth, from
shith to put, set. The Gnostic sect of Sethites (2c.) believed Christ was a reappearance of Seth,
whom they venerated as the first spiritual man.


Montanist (n.)

mid-15c., millenarian and severely ascetic sect that believed in continual direct inspiration of the
spirit and offered prominent church roles to women, from Montanus, Christian-inspired prophet in the
wilds of Phrygia c.160 C.E. The heresy persisted into the 6c. and helped bring prophecy into
disrepute in the established Church. Related: Montanism.


baptist (n.)

c.1200, one who baptizes; see baptize + -ist. As member of a Protestant sect that believes in adult
baptism by immersion (with capital B-), attested from 1654; their opponents called them anabaptists.


anthropomorphite (n.)

mid-15c.; see anthropomorphite + -ist.    The sect of Antropomorfitis, whiche helden that God in his
godhede hath hondis and feet and othere suche membris. [Reginald Pecock, The Repressor of Over Much
Blaming of the Clergy, 1449]    Related: Anthropomorphitism (1660s).


anthropomorphic (adj.)

1806, from anthropomorphous + -ic. Originally in reference to regarding God or gods as having human
form and human characteristics; of animals and other things from 1858; the sect of the
Antropomorfites is mentioned in English from mid-15c. (see anthropomorphite).


Docetism (n.)

1846, heresy of the Docetae, who held that the body of Jesus was a phantom, from Greek Doketai, name
of the sect, literally believers, from dokein to seem, have the appearance of, think, related to
doxa (see decent).


pentecostal

1660s, pertaining to the Pentecost, from Latin pentecostalis (Tertullian), from pentecoste (see
pentecost). With a capital P- and meaning Pentecostalist, in reference to Christian sect emphasizing
gifts of the Holy Spirit (Acts ii), it is attested from 1904 (noun and adjective).


Jain

1805, from Hindi Jaina, from Sanskrit jinah saint, literally overcomer, from base ji to conquer,
related to jayah victory, from PIE root *gweie- (2) to press down, conquer. The sect dates from 6c.
B.C.E.


Essene (n.)

1550s, member of a Jewish sect (first recorded 2c. B.C.E.), from Latin, from Greek Essenoi, of
disputed etymology, perhaps from Hebrew tzenum the modest ones, or Hebrew hashaim the silent ones.
Klein suggests Syriac hasen, plural absolute state of hase pious.


ophidian (adj.)

pertaining to snakes, 1883, from Greek ophidion, diminutive of ophis serpent (see ophio-). Hence,
ophiolatry serpent-worship (1862), and the 2c. sect of the Ophit&aelig;, who revered the serpent as
the symbol of divine wisdom.


antinomian (n.)

one who maintains the moral law is not binding on Christians under the law of grace, 1640s, from
Medieval Latin Antinomi, name given to a sect of this sort that arose in Germany in 1535, from Greek
anti- opposite, against (see anti-) + nomos rule, law (see numismatics).


Sabbatarian (n.)

1610s, a Christian unusually strict about Sabbath observation, from Latin Sabbatarius (adj.), from
Sabbatum (see Sabbath). Meaning member of a Christian sect which maintained the Sabbath should be
observed on the seventh day is attested from 1640s; earlier sabbatary (1590s). Related:
Sabbatartianism.


Christian (n., adj.)

16c., forms replacing earlier Christen, from Old English cristen (noun and adjective), from a West
Germanic borrowing of Church Latin christianus, from Ecclesiastical Greek christianos, from Christos
(see Christ). First used in Antioch, according to Acts xi:25-26. Christian Science as the name of a
religious sect is from 1863.


bugger (n.)

sodomite, 1550s, earlier heretic (mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin Bulgarus a Bulgarian (see
Bulgaria), so called from bigoted notions of the sex lives of Eastern Orthodox Christians or of the
sect of heretics that was prominent there 11c. Compare Old French bougre Bulgarian, also heretic;
sodomite. Softened secondary sense of fellow, chap, is in British English from mid-19c. Related:
Buggerly.


stasis (n.)

stoppage of circulation, 1745, from medical Latin, from Greek stasis a standing still, a standing;
the posture of standing; a position, a point of the compass; position, state, or condition of
anything; also a party, a company, a sect, especially one for seditious purposes; related to statos
placed, verbal adjective of histemi cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


illuminati (n.)

1590s, plural of Latin illuminatus enlightened (in figurative sense), past participle of illuminare
(see illumination). Originally applied to a 16c. Spanish sect (the Alumbrados), then to other sects;
since 1797 used as a translation of German Illuminaten, name of a secret society founded 1776 in
Ingolstadt, Bavaria, and holding deistic and republican principles; hence used generally of free-
thinkers and sarcastically of those professing intellectual enlightenment (1816). Related:
Illuminatism; illuminatist.


suitor (n.)

c.1300, a frequenter; late 14c., follower, disciple, from Anglo-French seutor, suitor or directly
from Late Latin secutor follower, pursuer, from sect- past participle stem of sequi to follow (see
suit (n.)). Meaning plaintiff in a lawsuit is from mid-15c. Meaning one who seeks (a woman) in
marriage is from 1580s.


zealot (n.)

early 14c., member of a militant 1st century Jewish sect which fiercely resisted the Romans in
Palestine, from Late Latin zelotes, from Greek zelotes one who is a zealous follower, from zeloun to
be zealous, from zelos zeal (see zeal). Extended sense of a fanatical enthusiast first recorded
1630s (earlier in this sense was zelator, mid-15c.).


denomination (n.)

late 14c., a naming, act of giving a name to, from Old French denominacion nominating, naming, from
Latin denominationem (nominative denominatio) a calling by anything other than the proper name,
metonymy, from denominare to name, from de- completely (see de-) + nominare to name (see nominate).
Meaning a class is from mid-15c. Monetary sense is 1650s; meaning religious sect is 1716.


empiric (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin empiricus a physician guided by experience, from Greek empeirikos experienced,
from empeiria experience, from empeiros skilled, from en in (see en- (2)) + peira trial, experiment,
from PIE *per- to try, risk. Originally a school of ancient physicians who based their practice on
experience rather than theory. Earlier as a noun (1540s) in reference to the sect, and earliest
(1520s) in a sense quack doctor which was in frequent use 16c.-19c.


Anabaptist (n.)

1530s, one who baptizes over again, from Modern Latin anabaptista, from Latin anabaptismus second
baptism (used in literal sense from 4c.; see anabaptism).    Originally in English in reference to
sect that practiced adult baptism and arose in Germany 1521. Probably so called because, as a new
faith, they baptized converts who already had been baptized (as infants) in the older Christian
churches. Modern branches only baptize once (adults) and do not actively seek converts. The name
also was applied, usually opprobriously, to Baptists, perhaps due to the multiple immersions of
their baptisms.


Pharisee (n.)

from Old English Fariseos, Old French pharise (13c.), and directly from Late Latin Pharis&aelig;us,
from Greek Pharisaios, from Aramaic perishayya, emphatic plural of perish separated, separatist,
corresponding to Hebrew parush, from parash he separated. Ancient Jewish sect (2c. B.C.E.-1c. C.E.)
distinguished by strict observance but regarded as pretentious and self-righteous, at least by Jesus
(Matt. xxiii:27). Meaning self-righteous person, formalist, hypocrite is attested from 1580s.


assassin (n.)

1530s (in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c.), via French and Italian, from Arabic hashishiyyin hashish-
users, plural of hashishiyy, from hashish (q.v.). A fanatical Ismaili Muslim sect of the time of the
Crusades, under leadership of the Old Man of the Mountains (translates Arabic shaik-al-jibal, name
applied to Hasan ibu-al-Sabbah), with a reputation for murdering opposing leaders after intoxicating
themselves by eating hashish. The plural suffix -in was mistaken in Europe for part of the word
(compare Bedouin).


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


