sedentary (adj.)

1590s, remaining in one place, from Middle French s&#233;dentaire (16c.) and directly from Latin
sedentarius sitting, remaining in one place, from sedentem (nominative sedens), present participle
of sedere to sit; occupy an official seat, preside; sit still, remain; be fixed or settled, from PIE
root *sed- (1) to sit (cognates: Sanskrit a-sadat sat down, sidati sits; Old Persian hadis abode;
Greek ezesthai to sit, hedra seat, chair, face of a geometric solid; Old Irish suide seat, sitting;
Welsh sedd seat, eistedd sitting; Old Church Slavonic se&#382;da, sedeti to sit; Lithuanian sedmi to
sit; Russian sad garden, Lithuanian soditi to plant; Gothic sitan, Old English sittan to sit; see
sit). Of persons, the sense not in the habit of exercise is recorded from 1660s.


sessile (adj.)

1725, adhering close to the surface, from Latin sessilis pertaining to sitting, for sitting on, from
sessum, past participle of sedere to sit (see sedentary). In botany from 1753. Meaning sedentary
first recorded 1860.


sederunt (n.)

sitting, session, Latin, literally they sat (typical opening word in recordings of such
proceedings), third person plural past tense of sedere to sit (see sedentary).


sediment (n.)

1540s, matter which settles at the bottom of water or other liquid, from Middle French
s&eacute;diment (16c.) and directly from Latin sedimentum a settling, sinking down, from stem of
sedere to settle, sit (see sedentary).


seance (n.)

1789, sitting, session, as of a learned society, from French s&eacute;ance a sitting, from seoir to
sit, from Latin sedere (see sedentary). Meaning spiritualistic session first recorded 1845.


sedative (adj.)

tending to calm or soothe, early 15c., from Medieval Latin sedativus calming, allaying, from sedat-,
past participle stem of sedare, causative of sedere to sit (see sedentary). The noun derivative
meaning a sedative drug is attested from 1785. Hence, whatever soothes or allays.


sedate (adj.)

calm, quiet, 1660s, from Latin sedatus composed, moderate, quiet, tranquil, past participle of
sedare to settle, calm, causative of sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Sedately.


polyhedron (n.)

1560s, from Latinized form of Greek polyedron, neuter of adjective polyedros having many bases or
sides, from polys many (see poly-) + hedra seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE
root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


ephedra (n.)

genus of low, branchy desert shrubs, 1914, from Modern Latin (1737) from Greek ephedra, a name given
by Pliny to the horsetail, literally sitting upon, from fem. of ephedros, from epi on (see epi-) +
hedra seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid (see sedentary). The reason for the name is not
known.


dissident (adj.)

1530s, from Latin dissidentem (nominative dissidens), present participle of dissidere to be remote;
disagree, be removed from, literally to sit apart, from dis- apart (see dis-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary).


preside (v.)

1610s, from French pr&eacute;sider preside over, govern (15c.), from Latin praesidere stand guard;
superintend, literally sit in front of, from prae before (see pre-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary).


assiduous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin assiduus attending; continually present, incessant; busy; constant, from assidere
to sit down to, thus constantly occupied at one's work; from ad to (see ad-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary). The word acquired a taint of servility in 18c. Related: Assiduously; assiduousness.


dodecahedron (n.)

1560s, from Greek dodeka twelve (short for duodeka, from duo two + deka ten; compare dozen) + hedra
seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


octahedron (n.)

1560s, from Greek oktahedron, neuter of oktahedros eight-sided, from okta- eight (see octa-) + hedra
seat (see sedentary). Related: Octahedral.


assiento (n.)

1714, contract between the King of Spain and another power (especially that made at the Peace of
Utrecht, 1713, with Great Britain for furnishing African slaves to the Spanish colonies in the
Americas), from Spanish asiento, from asentar to adjust, settle, establish, literally to place on a
chair, from a sentar, from Latin sedens, present participle of sedere to sit (see sedentary).


insidious (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French insidieux (15c.) or directly from Latin insidiosus deceitful, cunning,
artful, from insidiae (plural) plot, snare, ambush, from insidere sit on, occupy, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Insidiously; insidiousness.


see (n.)

c.1300, throne of a bishop, archbishop, or pope, also throne of a monarch, a goddess, Antichrist,
etc., from Old French sie seat, throne; town, capital; episcopal see, from Latin sedem (nominative
sedes) seat, throne, abode, temple, related to sedere to sit (see sedentary). Early 14c. as
administrative center of a bishopric; c.1400 as province under the jurisdiction of a bishop.


obsess (v.)

c.1500, to besiege, from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere watch closely; besiege, occupy;
stay, remain, abide literally sit opposite to, from ob against (see ob-) + sedere sit (see
sedentary). Of evil spirits, to haunt, from 1530s. Psychological sense is 20c. Related: Obsessed;
obsessing.


piezo-

word-forming element meaning pressure, from comb. form of Greek piezein to press tight, squeeze,
from PIE *pi-sed-yo- to sit upon (cognates: Sanskrit pidayati presses, oppresses), from *pi on,
short for *epi (see epi-) + *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary). First in piezometer (1820); in common
use in word formation from c.1900.


Eisteddfod (n.)

annual assembly of Welsh bards, 1822, from Welsh, literally session, from eistedd to sit (from sedd
seat, cognate with Latin sedere; see sedentary) + bod to be (cognate with Old English beon; see be).


supersede (v.)

mid-15c., Scottish, postpone, defer, from Middle French superceder desist, delay, defer, from Latin
supersedere literally sit on top of; also, with ablative, stay clear of, abstain from, forbear,
refrain from, from super above (see super-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Meaning displace,
replace first recorded 1640s. Related: Superseded; superseding.


siege (n.)

early 13c., a seat (as in Siege Perilous, early 13c., the vacant seat at Arthur's Round Table,
according to prophecy to be occupied safely only by the knight destined to find the Holy Grail),
from Old French sege seat, throne, from Vulgar Latin *sedicum seat, from Latin sedere sit (see
sedentary). The military sense is attested from c.1300; the notion is of an army sitting down before
a fortress.


tetrahedron (n.)

triangular pyramid, solid figure contained by four triangular surfaces, 1560s, from Late Greek
tetraedron, noun use of neuter of tetraedros (adj.) four-sided, from tetra- four (see tetra-) +
hedra seat, base, chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).
Related: Tetrahedral.


reside (v.)

late 15c., to settle, from Middle French resider (15c.) and directly from Latin residere sit down,
settle; remain behind, rest, linger; be left, from re- back, again (see re-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary). Meaning to dwell permanently first attested 1570s. Related: Resided; residing. Also from
the French word are Dutch resideren, German residiren.


subside (v.)

1680s, of objects, to sink to the bottom, from Latin subsidere sit down, settle, sink, fall; remain;
crouch down, squat, from sub down (see sub-) + sidere to settle, related to sedere to sit (see
sedentary). Of liquid surfaces, to sink to a lower level, be reduced from 1706. Related: Subsided;
subsiding.


soot (n.)

Old English sot soot, from Proto-Germanic *sotam soot (cognates: Old Norse sot, Old Dutch soet,
North Frisian sutt), literally what settles, from PIE *sod-o- (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
sa&#382;da, Lithuanian suod&#382;iai, Old Irish suide, Breton huzel soot), suffixed form of root
*sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


saddle (n.)

Old English sadol seat for a rider, from Proto-Germanic *sathulaz (cognates: Old Norse
s&ouml;&eth;ull, Old Frisian sadel, Dutch zadel, zaal, German Sattel saddle), from PIE *sed- (1) to
sit (cognates: Latin sedere to sit, Old Church Slavonic sedlo saddle; see sedentary). Figurative
phrase in the saddle in an active position of management is attested from 1650s. Saddle stitch (n.)
was originally in bookbinding (1887).


session (n.)

late 14c., periodical sitting of a court, from Old French session act or state of sitting; assembly,
from Latin sessionem (nominative sessio) act of sitting; a seat; loitering; a session, noun of
action from past participle stem of sedere to sit (see sedentary). Sense of period set aside for
some activity is first recorded 1920, in bull session, probably from quarter sessions courts (see
quarter (n.)). Musical sense of recording occasion in a studio is from 1927.


icosahedron (n.)

1560s, from Greek eikosahedron, neuter of eikosahedros, from eikosi twenty + -hedra seat, base,
chair, face of a geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary). Greek eikosi is
from PIE *wikmti- twenty, from *wi- in half, hence two + (d)kmti-, from root *dekm- ten (see ten).


assess (v.)

early 15c., to fix the amount (of a tax, fine, etc.), from Anglo-French assesser, from Medieval
Latin assessare fix a tax upon, originally frequentative of Latin assessus a sitting by, past
participle of assidere to sit beside (and thus to assist in the office of a judge), from ad- to (see
ad-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). One of the judge's assistant's jobs was to fix the amount of a
fine or tax. Meaning to estimate the value of property for the purpose of taxing it is from 1809;
transferred sense of to judge the value of a person, idea, etc. is from 1934. Related: Assessed;
assessing.


Upanishad (n.)

one of a class of speculative treatises in Sanskrit literature, 1805, from Sanskrit upa-nishad,
literally a sitting down beside. From upa near to (see up (adv.)) + ni-shad to sit or lie down, from
ni downward (from PIE *ni-, see nether) + -sad sitting, From PIE *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


sedan (n.)

1630s, covered chair on poles, possibly from a southern Italian dialect derivative of Italian sede
chair (compare Italian seggietta, 1590s; the thing itself was said to have been introduced from
Naples), from Latin sedes, related to sedere sit (see sedentary). Since Johnson's conjecture, often
derived from the town of Sedan in France, where it was said to have been made or first used, but
historical evidence for this is lacking.    Introduced in England by Sir Sanders Duncombe in 1634
and first called a covered chair. In Paris the sedan-chair man was usually an Auvergnat, in London
an Irishman [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1929]. Meaning closed automobile seating four or more first
recorded 1912, American English.


settle (n.)

long bench, 1550s, from Middle English setle a seat, from Old English setl a seat, stall; position,
abode; setting of a heavenly body, related to sittan to sit, from Proto-Germanic *setla- (cognates:
Middle Low German, Middle Dutch setel, Dutch zetel, German Sessel, Gothic sitls), from PIE *sedla-
(cognates: Latin sella seat, chair, Old Church Slavonic sedlo saddle, Old English sadol saddle),
from root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


yarn (n.)

Old English gearn spun fiber, spun wool, from Proto-Germanic *garnan (cognates: Old Norse, Old High
German, German garn, Middle Dutch gaern, Dutch garen yarn), from PIE root *ghere- intestine, gut,
entrail (cognates: Old Norse gorn gut, Sanskrit hira vein; entrails, Latin hernia rupture, Greek
khorde intestine, gut-string, Lithuanian zarna gut). The phrase to spin a yarn to tell a story is
first attested 1812, from a sailors' expression, on notion of telling stories while engaged in
sedentary work such as yarn-twisting.


nest (n.)

Old English nest bird's nest, snug retreat, also young bird, brood, from Proto-Germanic *nistaz
(cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch nest, German Nest), from PIE *nizdo- (cognates: Sanskrit
nidah resting place, nest, Latin nidus nest, Old Church Slavonic gnezdo, Old Irish net, Welsh nyth,
Breton nez nest), probably from *ni down + *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    Used since Middle
English in reference to various accumulations of things (such as a nest of drawers, early 18c.).
Nest egg retirement savings is from 1700, originally a real or artificial egg left in a nest to
induce the hen to go on laying there (c.1600).


cathedral (n.)

1580s, church of a bishop, from phrase cathedral church (c.1300), partially translating Late Latin
ecclesia cathedralis church of a bishop's seat, from Latin cathedra an easy chair (principally used
by ladies), also metonymically, as in cathedrae molles luxurious women; also a professor's chair;
from Greek kathedra seat, bench, from kata down (see cata-) + hedra seat, base, chair, face of a
geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    It was born an adjective, and
attempts to cobble further adjectivization onto it in 17c. yielded cathedraical (1670s), cathedratic
(1660s), cathedratical (1660s), after which the effort seems to have been given up.


sit (v.)

Old English sittan to occupy a seat, be seated, sit down, seat oneself; remain, continue; settle,
encamp, occupy; lie in wait; besiege (class V strong verb; past tense s&aelig;t, past participle
seten), from Proto-Germanic *setjan (cognates: Old Saxon sittian, Old Norse sitja, Danish sidde, Old
Frisian sitta, Middle Dutch sitten, Dutch zitten, Old High German sizzan, German sitzen, Gothic
sitan), from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    With past tense sat, formerly also set,
now restricted to dialect, and sate, now archaic; and past participle sat, formerly sitten. In
reference to a legislative assembly, from 1510s. Meaning to baby-sit is recorded from 1966.    To
sit back be inactive is from 1943. To sit on one's hands was originally to withhold applause (1926);
later, to do nothing (1959). To sit around be idle, do nothing is 1915, American English. To sit out
not take part is from 1650s. Sitting pretty is from 1916.


