sedition (n.)

mid-14c., rebellion, uprising, revolt, concerted attempt to overthrow civil authority; violent
strife between factions, civil or religious disorder, riot; rebelliousness against authority, from
Old French sedicion (14c., Modern French s&#233;dition) and directly from Latin seditionem
(nominative seditio) civil disorder, dissention, strife; rebellion, mutiny, literally a going apart,
separation, from se- apart (see secret) + itio a going, from past participle of ire to go (see ion).
Meaning conduct or language inciting to rebellion against a lawful government is from 1838. An Old
English word for it was folcslite. Less serious than treason, as wanting an overt act, But it is not
essential to the offense of sedition that it threaten the very existence of the state or its
authority in its entire extent [Century Dictionary].


seditious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French seditieux, from Latin seditiosus full of discord, factious, mutinous,
from seditio (see sedition). Related: Seditiously; seditiousness.


seduction (n.)

1520s, from Middle French s&eacute;duction, from Latin seductionem (nominative seductio), noun of
action from past participle stem of seducere (see seduce). Originally with reference to actions or
beliefs; sexual sense is from 1769, originally always with women as the objects. Earlier appearance
of the word in Middle English with a sense treason, treachery probably is a confusion with sedition,
which confusion also is found in Old French seducion treason, betrayal.


amusement (n.)

c.1600, diversion of attention, especially in military actions, from French amusement, noun of
action from amuser (see amuse).    And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching matters of
high nature, and all malicious and false Reports tending to Sedition, or to the Amusement of Our
People, are punishable ... (etc.) [Charles II, Proclamation of Oct. 26, 1688]  Meaning a pastime,
play, game, anything which pleasantly diverts the attention (from duty, work, etc.) is from 1670s,
originally depreciative; meaning pleasurable diversion attested from 1690s. Amusement hall is from
1862; amusement park first recorded 1897.


