seduce (v.)

1520s, to persuade a vassal, etc., to desert his allegiance or service, from Latin seducere lead
away, lead astray, from se- aside, away (see secret (n.)) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sexual
sense, now the prevailing one, is attested from 1550s and apparently was not in Latin. Originally
entice (a woman) to a surrender of chastity. Related: Seduced; seducing.    Replaced Middle English
seduisen (late 15c.), from Middle French s&eacute;duire seduce, from Old French suduire to corrupt,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, withdraw, remove (see subduce).


seductress (n.)

1803, female seducer, with -ess + obsolete seductor (late 15c., displaced by seducer), from a direct
borrowing of the Latin agent noun of seducere (see seduce).


seductible (adj.)

1620s, from seduct-, past participle stem of Latin seducere (see seduce) + -ible. Related:
Seductibly; seductibility.


seductive (adj.)

1740, from Latin seduct-, past participle stem of seducere (see seduce) + -ive. Related:
Seductively; seductiveness. Middle English had seducious deceitful, devious (mid-15c.).


deprave (v.)

late 14c., corrupt, lead astray, pervert, from Old French depraver (14c.) or directly from Latin
depravare distort, disfigure; figuratively to pervert, seduce, corrupt, from de- completely (see
de-) + pravus crooked. Related: Depraved; depraving.


inveigle (v.)

late 15c., to blind (someone's) judgment, alteration of Middle French aveugler delude, make blind,
from Vulgar Latin *aboculus without sight, blind, from Latin ab- without (see ab-) + oculus eye (see
eye (n.)). Loan-translation of Greek ap ommaton without eyes. Meaning to win over by deceit, seduce
is 1530s.


subdue (v.)

late 14c., to conquer and reduce to subjection, from Old French souduire, but this meant deceive,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, lead away, carry off; withdraw (see subduce). The primary
sense in English seems to have been taken in Anglo-French from Latin subdere and attached to this
word. Related: Subdued; subduing. As an associated noun, subdual is attested from 1670s (subduction
having acquired other senses).


toll (v.)

to sound with slow single strokes (intransitive), mid-15c., probably a special use of tollen to
draw, lure, early 13c. variant of Old English -tyllan in betyllan to lure, decoy, and fortyllan draw
away, seduce, of obscure origin. The notion is perhaps of luring people to church with the sound of
the bells, or of drawing on the bell rope. Transitive sense from late 15c. Related: Tolled; tolling.
The noun meaning a stroke of a bell is from mid-15c.


corrupt (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French corropt unhealthy, corrupt; uncouth (of language), and directly from Latin
corruptus, past participle of corrumpere to destroy; spoil, figuratively corrupt, seduce, bribe,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + rup-, past participle stem of rumpere to break (see
rupture (n.)). Related: Corruptly; corruptness.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


seduction (n.)

1520s, from Middle French s&eacute;duction, from Latin seductionem (nominative seductio), noun of
action from past participle stem of seducere (see seduce). Originally with reference to actions or
beliefs; sexual sense is from 1769, originally always with women as the objects. Earlier appearance
of the word in Middle English with a sense treason, treachery probably is a confusion with sedition,
which confusion also is found in Old French seducion treason, betrayal.


suborn (v.)

to procure unlawfully, to bribe to accomplish a wicked purpose, especially to induce a witness to
perjury, to lure (someone) to commit a crime, 1530s, from Middle French suborner seduce, instigate,
bribe (13c.) and directly from Latin subornare employ as a secret agent, incite secretly, originally
equip, fit out, furnish, from sub under, secretly (see sub-) + ornare equip, related to ordo order
(see order (n.)). Related: Suborned; suborning.


rape (v.)

late 14c., seize prey; abduct, take by force, from rape (n.) and from Anglo-French raper (Old French
rapir) to seize, abduct, a legal term, probably from past participle of Latin rapere seize, carry
off by force, abduct (see rapid).    Latin rapere was used for sexually violate, but only very
rarely; the usual Latin word being stuprare to defile, ravish, violate, related to stuprum (n.),
literally disgrace. Meaning to abduct (a woman), ravish; also seduce (a man) is from early 15c. in
English. Related: Raped; raping. Uncertain connection to Low German and Dutch rapen in the same
sense.


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


