seemly (adj.)

of pleasing or good appearance, also proper, tasteful, decorous, early 13c., semlich, from Old Norse
soemiligr becoming, honorable, from soemr (see seem). Related: Seemliness. Old Norse also had
soemleitr fine to look at.


mannerly (adj.)

well-mannered, seemly, modest, late 14c., from manner (n.) + -ly (1). As an adverb, in accord with
custom; becomingly (mid-14c.); later in accord with good manners (c.1400). Related: Mannerliness.


unseemly (adj.)

early 14c., unfitting, indecent, from un- (1) not + seemly (adj.). Similar formation in Old Norse
usoemiligr. Related: Unseemliness.


decorous (adj.)

1660s, from Latin decorus becoming, seemly, fitting, proper, from decus (genitive decoris) ornament
(see decorate). Related: Decorously; decorousness.


docimacy (n.)

judicial inquiry into the character of aspirants for office or citizenship, especially in ancient
Athens, 1801, from Greek dokimasia assay, proving, examination, from stem of dokimazein to test,
prove, from dokimos proven, genuine, literally accepted, related to dekhesthai to take, accept,
cognate with Latin decere to be seemly or fitting (see decent).


indecorous (adj.)

1670s, from Latin indecorus unbecoming, unseemly, unsightly, from in- not, opposite of, without (see
in- (1)) + decorus becoming, fitting, seemly, proper (see decorous). Related: Indecorously;
indecorousness.


decorum (n.)

1560s, from Latin decorum that which is seemly, noun use of neuter of adjective decorus fit, proper,
from decor (see decor).


seem (v.)

c.1200, to appear to be; c.1300, to be fitting, be appropriate, be suitable, though the more recent
sense in English is the etymological one; from Old Norse soema to honor; to put up with; to conform
to (the world, etc.), verb derived from adjective soemr fitting, from Proto-Germanic *somi-
(cognates: Old English som agreement, reconciliation, seman to conciliate, source of Middle English
semen to settle a dispute, literally to make one; Old Danish some to be proper or seemly), from PIE
*som-i-, from root *sem- one, as one (see same). Related: Seemed; seeming.


decent (adj.)

1530s, proper to one's station or rank, also tasteful, from Middle French d&eacute;cent, or directly
from Latin decentem (nominative decens) becoming, seemly, fitting, proper, present participle of
decere to be fitting or suitable, from PIE *deke-, from root *dek- to take, accept, to receive,
greet, be suitable (cognates: Greek dokein to appear, seem, think, dekhesthai to accept; Sanskrit
da&#347;asyati shows honor, is gracious, dacati makes offerings, bestows; Latin docere to teach,
decus grace, ornament). Meaning kind, pleasant is from 1902. Are you decent? (1949) was originally
backstage theater jargon for are you dressed.


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


doctor (n.)

c.1300, Church father, from Old French doctour, from Medieval Latin doctor religious teacher,
adviser, scholar, in classical Latin teacher, agent noun from docere to show, teach, cause to know,
originally make to appear right, causative of decere be seemly, fitting (see decent).    Meaning
holder of highest degree in university is first found late 14c.; as is that of medical professional
(replacing native leech (n.2)), though this was not common till late 16c. The transitional stage is
exemplified in Chaucer's Doctor of phesike (Latin physica came to be used extensively in Medieval
Latin for medicina). Similar usage of the equivalent of doctor is colloquial in most European
languages: Italian dottore, French docteur, German doktor, Lithuanian daktaras, though these are
typically not the main word in those languages for a medical healer. For similar evolution, see
Sanskrit vaidya- medical doctor, literally one versed in science. German Arzt, Dutch arts are from
Late Latin archiater, from Greek arkhiatros chief healer, hence court physician. French
m&eacute;decin is a back-formation from m&eacute;dicine, replacing Old French miege, from Latin
medicus.


