seethe (v.)

Old English seo&thorn;an to boil, also figuratively, be troubled in mind, brood (class II strong
verb; past tense sea&thorn;, past participle soden), from Proto-Germanic *seuthan (cognates: Old
Norse sjo&eth;a, Old Frisian siatha, Dutch zieden, Old High German siodan, German sieden to seethe),
from PIE root *seut- to seethe, boil.    Driven out of its literal meaning by boil (v.); it survives
largely in metaphoric extensions. Figurative use, of persons or populations, to be in a state of
inward agitation is recorded from 1580s (implied in seething). It had wider figurative uses in Old
English, such as to try by fire, to afflict with cares. Now conjugated as a weak verb, and past
participle sodden (q.v.) is no longer felt as connected.


seether (n.)

late 14c., one employed in boiling, agent noun from seethe.


sutler (n.)

formerly also suttler, person who follows an army to sell food to soldiers, 1580s, from Middle Dutch
soeteler small tradesman, peddler, victualer, camp cook (Dutch zoetelaar), cognate with Middle Low
German suteler, sudeler person who performs dirty tasks, Middle High German sudelen to cook badly,
Middle Dutch soetelen to cook badly. Probably also related to Dutch zieder, German sieden to seethe,
from Proto-Germanic *suth-, from PIE root *seut- to seethe, boil (see seethe).


suds (n.)

1540s, dregs, leavings, muck, especially in East Anglia, ooze left by flood (according to OED this
may be the original sense), perhaps borrowed from Middle Dutch sudse marsh, bog, or related words in
Frisian and Low German, cognate with Old English soden boiled, from Proto-Germanic *suth-, from PIE
*seut- to seethe, boil (see seethe). Meaning soapy water dates from 1580s; slang meaning beer first
attested 1904. Related: Sudsy.


boil (v.)

early 13c., from Old French bolir boil, bubble up, ferment, gush (12c., Modern French bouillir),
from Latin bullire to bubble, seethe, from PIE base *beu- to swell (see bull (n.2)). The native word
is seethe. Figurative sense of to agitate the feelings is from 1640s.I am impatient, and my blood
boyls high. [Thomas Otway, Alcibiades, 1675]  Related: Boiled; boiling. Boiling point is recorded
from 1773.


blubber (v.)

late 14c., to seethe, bubble, from blubber (n.). Meaning to cry, to overflow with weeping is from
c.1400. Related: Blubbered; blubbering.


sodden (adj.)

soaked or softened in water, 1820, earlier resembling something that has been boiled a long time
(1590s), originally boiled (c.1300), from Old English soden boiled, strong past participle of
seo&thorn;an to cook, boil (see seethe). For sense evolution from heat in water to immerse in water
compare bath.


ferment (v.)

late 14c., from Old French fermenter (13c.) and directly from Latin fermentare to leaven, ferment,
from fermentum substance causing fermentation, leaven, from root of fervere to boil, seethe (see
brew). Figurative use from 1650s. Related: Fermented; fermenting.


barm (n.)

Old English beorma yeast, leaven, also head of a beer, from Proto-Germanic *bermon- (cognates: Dutch
berm, Middle Low German barm), from PIE root *bher- (4) to cook, bake (cognates: Latin fermentum
substance causing fermentation, Sanskrit bhurati moves convulsively, quivers, Middle Irish berbaim I
boil, seethe; see brew (v.)).


warm (adj.)

Old English wearm warm, from Proto-Germanic *warmaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch,
Old High German, German warm, Old Norse varmr, Gothic warmjan to warm), of uncertain origin. On one
guess it is from PIE *gwher- (cognates: Sanskrit gharmah heat; Old Persian Garmapada-, name of the
fourth month, corresponding to June/July, from garma- heat; Armenian jerm warm; Greek thermos warm;
Latin formus warm, fornax oven; Old Irish fogeir heated; Hittite war- to burn). On another guess it
is connected to the source of Old Church Slavonic goriti to burn, var&#365; heat, variti to cook,
boil; and Lithuanian v&#233;rdu to seethe.    The use of distinct words, based on degree of heat,
for warm and hot is general in Balto-Slavic and Germanic, but in other languages one word often
covers both (Greek thermos; Latin calidus, French chaud, Spanish caliente). In reference to
feelings, etc., attested from late 15c. Of colors from 1764. Sense in guessing games first recorded
1860, from earlier hunting use in reference to scent or trail (1713). Warm-blooded in reference to
mammals is recorded from 1793. Warm-hearted first recorded c.1500.


