seine (n.)

Old English segne drag-net, from West Germanic *sagina (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German
segina), a borrowing of Latin sagena (source of French seine, 12c., which contributed to the form of
the English word), from Greek sagene a fishing net, also a hunting net, of unknown origin.


purse-seine (n.)

1870; see purse (n.) + seine.


Brie (n.)

type of soft cheese, 1848, from name of district in department Seine-et-Marne, southeast of Paris,
famous for its cheeses. The name is from Gaulish briga hill, height.


quai (n.)

1870, public path beside a waterway, from French quai (12c., see quay). Often short for Quai
d'Orsay, the street on the south bank of the Seine in Paris, since mid-19c. site of the French
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and hence sometimes used metonymically for it (1922).


Latin (adj.)

Old English latin, from Latin Latinus belonging to Latium, the region of Italy around Rome, possibly
from PIE root *stela- to spread, extend, with a sense of flat country (as opposed to the mountainous
district of the Sabines), or from a prehistoric non-IE language. The Latin adjective also was used
of the Roman language and people.   <b>Centurion:</b> What's this, then? â&euro;&tilde;People
called Romanes they go the house?â&euro;&trade;  <b>Brian:</b> It ... it says,
â&euro;&tilde;Romans, go home.â&euro;&trade;  <b>Centurion</b> [thrashing him like a schoolboy]:
No, it doesn't. â&euro;&tilde;Go home?' This is motion towards. Isn't it, boy?  <b>Brian:</b> Ah
... ah, dative, sir! Ahh! No, not dative! Not the dative, sir! No! Ah! Oh, the ... accusative!
Domum, sir! Ah! Oooh! Ah!  <b>Centurion</b> [pulling him by the ear]: Except that domum takes the
...?  <b>Brian:</b> The locative, sir!  [Monty Python, Life of Brian]    Used as a designation for
people whose languages descend from Latin (1856), hence Latin America (1862). The Latin Quarter
(French Quartier latin) of Paris, on the south (left) bank of the Seine, was the site of university
buildings in the Middle Ages, hence the place where Latin was spoken. The surname Latimer,
Lattimore, etc. is from Vulgar Latin latimarus, from Latin latinarius interpreter, literally a
speaker of Latin.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


left (adj.)

c.1200, from Kentish and northern English form of Old English lyft- weak, foolish (compare lyft-adl
lameness, paralysis, East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof weak, worthless). It emerged 13c. as
opposite of right (the left being usually the weaker hand), a derived sense also found in cognate
Middle Dutch and Low German luchter, luft. But German link, Dutch linker left are from Old High
German slinc and Middle Dutch slink left, related to Old English slincan crawl, Swedish linka limp,
slinka dangle.    Replaced Old English winestra, literally friendlier, a euphemism used
superstitiously to avoid invoking the unlucky forces connected with the left side (see sinister).
The Kentish word itself may have been originally a taboo replacement, if instead it represents PIE
root *laiwo-, meaning considered conspicuous (represented in Greek laios, Latin laevus, and Russian
levyi). Greek also uses a euphemism for left, aristeros the better one (compare also Avestan
vairyastara- to the left, from vairya- desirable). But Lithuanian kairys left and Lettish kreilis
left hand derive from a root that yields words for twisted, crooked.    As an adverb from early 14c.
As a noun from c.1200. Political sense arose from members of a legislative body assigned to the left
side of a chamber, first attested in English 1837 (by Carlyle, in reference to the French
Revolution), probably a loan-translation of French la gauche (1791), said to have originated during
the seating of the French National Assembly in 1789 in which the nobility took the seats on the
President's right and left the Third Estate to sit on the left. Became general in U.S. and British
political speech c.1900.    Used since at least c.1600 in various senses of irregular, illicit;
earlier proverbial sense was opposite of what is expressed (mid-15c.). Phrase out in left field out
of touch with pertinent realities is attested from 1944, from the baseball fielding position that
tends to be far removed from the play. To have two left feet be clumsy is attested by 1902. The Left
Bank of Paris (left bank of the River Seine, as you face downstream) has been associated with
intellectual and artistic culture since at least 1893.


