self-indulgence (n.)

also self indulgence, 1753, from self- + indulgence.


abstinence (n.)

mid-14c., forbearance in indulgence of the appetites, from Old French abstinence (earlier
astenance), from Latin abstinentia abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity, noun of
quality from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere (see abstain).
Specifically of sexual appetites from mid-14c., but also in Middle English of food, fighting,
luxury.


jaded (adj.)

bored by continual indulgence, 1630s; past participle adjective from jade (v.).


venial (adj.)

c.1300, pardonable, from Old French venial pardonable, excusable (13c.) and directly from Late Latin
venialis pardonable, from Latin venia forgiveness, indulgence, pardon, related to venus sexual love,
desire (see Venus). Related: Venially.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


lecher (n.)

man given to excessive sexual indulgence, late 12c., from Old French lecheor (Modern French
l&#233;cheur) one living a life of debauchery, especially one given to sexual indulgence, literally
licker, agent noun from lechier to lick, to live in debauchery or gluttony, from Frankish *likkon or
some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *likkojan to lick or some other Germanic source (see
lick). The Old French feminine form was lechiere. Middle English, meanwhile, had lickestre female
who licks; figuratively a pleasure seeker, literally lickster.


pardon (n.)

late 13c., papal indulgence, from Old French pardon, from pardoner to grant; forgive (11c., Modern
French pardonner), to grant, forgive, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare to give wholeheartedly, to remit,
from Latin per- through, thoroughly (see per) + donare give, present (see donation).    Meaning
passing over an offense without punishment is from c.1300, also in the strictly ecclesiastical
sense; sense of pardon for a civil or criminal offense; release from penalty or obligation is from
late 14c. earlier in Anglo-French. Weaker sense of excuse for a minor fault is attested from 1540s.


intemperate (adj.)

characterized by excessive indulgence in a passion or appetite, late 14c., from Latin intemperatus
untempered, inclement, immoderate, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + temperantia (see
temperance). Related: Intemperately.


over-indulgence (n.)

also overindulgence, 1630s, from over- + indulgence. First attested in Donne.


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


bestiality (n.)

late 14c., the nature of beasts, from bestial + -ity. Meaning indulgence in beastly instincts is
from 1650s; sense of sexual activity with a beast is from 1611 (KJV).


fondle (v.)

1690s, treat with indulgence and affection, frequentative of fond dote upon (see fond). Sense of
caress first recorded 1796. Related: Fondled; fondling (1670s as a past participle adjective).


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


play (n.)

Old English plega (West Saxon), pl&aelig;ga (Anglian) quick motion; recreation, exercise, any brisk
activity (the latter sense preserved in swordplay, etc.), from or related to Old English plegan (see
play (v.)). Meaning dramatic performance is attested by early 14c., perhaps late Old English.
Meaning free or unimpeded movement of mechanisms, etc., is from c.1200. By early Middle English it
could mean variously, a game, a martial sport, activity of children, joke or jesting, revelry,
sexual indulgence. Sporting sense the playing of a game first attested mid-15c.; sense of specific
maneuver or attempt is from 1868. To be in play (of a hit ball, etc.) is from 1788. Play-by-play is
attested from 1927. Play on words is from 1798. Play-money is attested from 1705 as money won in
gambling, by 1920 as pretend money.


brevet (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French brievet letter, note, piece of paper; papal indulgence (13c.), diminutive
of bref letter, note (see brief (adj.)). Army sense is from 1680s.


socialist (n.)

one who advocates socialism, 1827, from French socialiste, or else a native formation based on it,
in reference to the teachings of Comte de Saint-Simon, founder of French socialism. The word begins
to be used in French in the modern sense c.1835. Socialista, with a different sense, was applied
18c. to followers and pupils of Dutch jurist Grotius (1583-1645), from his use of socialistus.
Socialist realism attested from 1934.    I find that socialism is often misunderstood by its least
intelligent supporters and opponents to mean simply unrestrained indulgence of our natural
propensity to heave bricks at respectable persons. [George Bernard Shaw, An Unsocial Socialist,
1900]   <hr />   Prison is a Socialist's Paradise, where equality prevails, everything is supplied
and competition is eliminated. [Elbert Hubbard, The Note Book, 1927]


splurge (n.)

1828, ostentatious display, American English, of uncertain origin; originally among the class of
words considered characteristic of Western (i.e. Kentucky) dialect. Perhaps a blend of splash and
surge. The meaning extravagant indulgence in spending is first recorded 1928.


decadent (adj.)

in a state of decline or decay (from a former condition of excellence), 1837, from French
d&eacute;cadent, back-formation from d&eacute;cadence (see decadence). In reference to literary
(later, other artistic) schools that believed, or affected to believe, they lived in an age of
artistic decadence, 1885 in French, 1888 in English. Usually in a bad sense:    Bread, supposedly
the staff of life, has become one of our most decadent foods -- doughy, gummy, and without the
aroma, flavor, texture, taste and appearance that is typical of good bread. [College and University
Business 1960]    Beckoning sense of desirable and satisfying to self-indulgence begins c.1970 in
commercial publications in reference to desserts.


indulge (v.)

1630s, to grant as a favor; 1650s, of both persons and desires, to treat with unearned favor; a
back-formation from indulgence, or else from Latin indulgere to be complaisant. Related: Indulged;
indulging.


indulgent (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin indulgentem (nominative indulgens), present participle of indulgere (see
indulgence). Related: Indulgently.


forgiveness (n.)

Old English forgiefnes pardon, forgiveness, indulgence; see forgive + -ness.


sobriety (n.)

c.1400, moderation in indulgence, from Old French sobriete sobriety, moderation (Modern French
sobriet&eacute;) or directly from Latin sobrietatem (nominative sobrietas), from sobrius (see sober
(adj.)). Meaning steadiness, gravity is recorded from 1540s.


petting (n.)

1873, fondling indulgence, verbal noun from pet (v.). Meaning amorous caressing, foreplay is from
1920 (in F. Scott Fitzgerald).


fling (n.)

attempt, attack, early 14c.; see fling (v.). Sense of period of indulgence on the eve of
responsibilities first attested 1827. Meaning vigorous dance (associated with the Scottish
Highlands) is from 1806.


sensualism (n.)

1803, the philosophical doctrine that the senses are the sole source of knowledge, from sensual +
-ism. From 1813 as addiction to sensual indulgence.


