semblance (n.)

c.1300, fact of appearing to view, from Old French semblance, from semblant likeness, appearance,
present participle of sembler to seem, appear, from Latin simulare to resemble, imitate, from
similis like (see similar (adj.)). Meaning person's appearance or demeanor is attested from c.1400;
that of false, assumed or deceiving appearance is from 1590s. Meaning person or thing that resembles
another is attested from 1510s.


theodolite (n.)

surveying instrument, 1570s, of unknown origin (see OED for discussion). The word has a Gr[eek]
semblance, but no obvious Gr[eek] basis [Century Dictionary].


semblable (adj.)

resembling, late 14c., from Old French semblable (12c.), from sembler to be like (see semblance).


appearance (n.)

late 14c., visible state or form, figure; mere show, from Anglo-French apparaunce, Old French
aparance appearance, display, pomp (13c.), from Latin apparentia, abstract noun from aparentem, past
participle of apparere (see appear). Meaning semblance is recorded from early 15c.; that of action
of coming into view is mid-15c. Phrase keep up appearances attested from 1760 (save appearances in
same sense is 1711).


suspension (n.)

early 15c., a temporary halting or deprivation, from Latin suspensionem (nominative suspensio) the
act or state of hanging up, a vaulting, noun of action, from past participle stem of suspendere to
hang up, cause to hang, suspend (see suspend). Suspension of disbelief is from Coleridge:  A
semblance of truth sufficient to procure for these shadows of imagination that willing suspension of
disbelief for the moment, which constitutes poetic faith. [Biographia Literaria, 1817]    Meaning
action of hanging by a support from above is attested from 1540s. Meaning particles suspended in
liquid without dissolving is from 1707. Suspension-bridge first recorded 1819 (earlier suspended
bridge, 1796).


vampire (n.)

spectral being in a human body who maintains semblance of life by leaving the grave at night to suck
the warm blood of the living as they sleep, 1734, from French vampire (18c.) or German Vampir (1732,
in an account of Hungarian vampires), from Hungarian vampir, from Old Church Slavonic opiri
(cognates: Serbian vampir, Bulgarian vapir, Ukrainian uper), said by Slavic linguist Franc
Miklo&#353;i&#269; to be ultimtely from Kazan Tatar ubyr witch, but Max Vasmer, an expert in this
linguistic area, finds that phonetically doubtful. An Eastern European creature popularized in
English by late 19c. gothic novels, however there are scattered English accounts of night-walking,
blood-gorged, plague-spreading undead corpses from as far back as 1196. Figurative sense of person
who preys on others is from 1741. Applied 1774 by French biologist Buffon to a species of South
American blood-sucking bat. Related: Vampiric.


