sensualism (n.)

1803, the philosophical doctrine that the senses are the sole source of knowledge, from sensual +
-ism. From 1813 as addiction to sensual indulgence.


sensual (adj.)

early 15c., carnal, unspiritual; mid-15c., of or pertaining to the senses, from Middle French
sensuel (15c.) and directly from Late Latin sensualis endowed with feeling (see sensuality). Meaning
connected with gratification of the senses, especially lewd, unchaste is attested from late 15c.


sensualist (n.)

1660s, from sensual + -ist.


sensualize (v.)

1680s, from sensual + -ize. Related: Sensualized; sensualizing.


voluptuous (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to desires or appetites, from Old French voluptueux, volumptueuse and
directly from Latin voluptuosus full of pleasure, delightful, from voluptas pleasure, delight,
enjoyment, satisfaction, from volup pleasurably, perhaps ultimately related to velle to wish, from
PIE *wel- (2) to wish, will (see will (v.)). Meaning addicted to sensual pleasure is recorded from
mid-15c. Sense of suggestive of sensual pleasure is attested from 1816 (Byron); especially in
reference to feminine beauty from 1839. Related: Voluptuously; voluptuousness.


lambada (n.)

sensual Brazilian dance, 1988, from Portuguese, said in some sources to be literally a beating, a
lashing. But others connect it ultimately to Latin lumbus loin.


earth-mother (n.)

1904, folkloric spirit of the earth, conceived as sensual, maternal; a translation of German
erdmutter.


beastly (adj.)

c.1200, brutish, sensual, debased; late 14c., in the manner of a beast, from beast + -ly (1).
Weakened in British upper crust use to awfully, exceedingly by mid-19c. Beastly drunk is from 1803.


swinish (adj.)

c.1200, originally of persons or behavior, like a swine; gluttonous, sensual, degraded, beastly,
from swine + -ish. Related: Swinishly; swinishness. Similar formation in German schweinisch. Old
English had swinlic in same sense.


epicure (n.)

late 14c., follower of Epicurus, from Latin Epicurus, from Greek Epicouros (341-270 B.C.E.),
Athenian philosopher who taught that pleasure is the highest good and identified virtue as the
greatest pleasure; the first lesson recalled, the second forgotten, and the name used pejoratively
for one who gives himself up to sensual pleasure (1560s), especially glutton, sybarite (1774).
Epicurus' school opposed by stoics, who first gave his name a reproachful sense. Non-pejorative
meaning one who cultivates refined taste in food and drink is from 1580s.


agape (n.)

c.1600, from Greek agape brotherly love, charity, from agapan greet with affection, love, of unknown
origin. Agape was used by early Christians for their love feast held in connection with the Lord's
Supper. In modern use, often in simpler sense of Christian love (1856, frequently opposed to eros as
carnal or sensual love).


Sophronia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophronia, from sophron (genitive sophronos) discreet, prudent,
sensible, having control over sensual desires, moderate, chaste, literally of sound mind, from sos
safe, sound, whole + phren midriff, heart, mind (see phreno-).


sultry (adj.)

1590s, oppressively hot, close and moist (of weather), ultimately from swelter + alteration of -y
(2), either as a contraction of sweltry or from obsolete verb sulter to swelter (1580s), alteration
of swelter. Figurative sense of hot with lust is attested from 1704; of women, lascivious, sensual,
arousing desire it is recorded from 1940. Related: Sultriness.


pleasure (n.)

late 14c., condition of enjoyment, from Old French plesir, also plaisir enjoyment, delight, desire,
will (12c.), from noun use of infinitive plaisir (v.) to please, from Latin placere to please, give
pleasure, be approved (see please (v.)). Ending altered in English 14c. by influence of words in
-ure (measure, etc.). Meaning sensual enjoyment as the chief object of life is attested from 1520s.


carnal (adj.)

c.1400, physical, human, mortal, from Old French carnal and directly from Medieval Latin carnalis
natural, of the same blood, from Latin carnis of the flesh, genitive of caro flesh, meat (see
carnage). Meaning sensual is from early 15c.; that of worldly, sinful is from mid-15c. Carnal
knowledge is attested from early 15c. and was in legal use by 1680s.


libidinous (adj.)

lustful, mid-15c., Old French libidineus (13c., Modern French libidineux), from Latin libidinosus
full of desire, lustful, from libido pleasure, desire, sensual passion, lust (see libido). Related:
Libidinously; libidinousness.


sensuous (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to the senses apparently coined by Milton to recover the original meaning of
sensual and avoid the lascivious connotation that the older word had acquired, but by 1870 sensuous,
too, had begun down the same path and come to mean alive to the pleasures of the senses. Rare before
Coleridge popularized it To express in one word all that appertains to the perception, considered as
passive and merely recipient .... (1814). From Latin sensus (see sense (n.)) + -ous. Related:
Sensuously; sensuousness.


Platonic (adj.)

1530s, of or pertaining to Greek philosopher Plato (429 B.C.E.-c.347 B.C.E.), from Latin Platonicus,
from Greek Platonikos. The name is Greek Platon, properly broad-shouldered (from platys broad; see
plaice (n.)). His original name was Aristocles. The meaning love free of sensual desire (1630s),
which the word usually carries nowadays, is a Renaissance notion; it is based on Plato's writings in
Symposium about the kind of interest Socrates took in young men, which originally had no reference
to women. Related: Platonically.


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


flesh (n.)

Old English fl&aelig;sc flesh, meat, also near kindred (a sense now obsolete except in phrase flesh
and blood), common West and North Germanic (compare Old Frisian flesk, Middle Low German vlees,
German Fleisch flesh, Old Norse flesk pork, bacon), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Proto-Germanic
*flaiskoz-.    Figurative use for animal or physical nature of man (Old English) is from the Bible,
especially Paul's use of Greek sarx, which yielded sense of sensual appetites (c.1200). Flesh-wound
is from 1670s; flesh-color, the hue of Caucasian skin, is first recorded 1610s, described as a tint
composed of a light pink with a little yellow [O'Neill, Dyeing, 1862]. An Old English poetry-word
for body was fl&aelig;sc-hama, literally flesh-home.


Venus

late Old English, from Latin Venus (plural veneres), in ancient Roman mythology, the goddess of
beauty and love, especially sensual love, from venus love, sexual desire; loveliness, beauty, charm;
a beloved object, from PIE root *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire (cognates: Sanskrit veti
follows after, vanas- desire, vanati desires, loves, wins; Avestan vanaiti he wishes, is victorious,
vayeiti hunts; Lithuanian veju to hunt, pursue; Old Church Slavonic voji warrior; Old English
wa&thorn; hunting, wynn joy, wunian to dwell, wenian to accustom, train, wean, wyscan to wish; Old
Norse vei&eth;r chase, hunting, fishing). Applied by the Romans to Greek Aphrodite, Egyptian Hathor,
etc.    Applied in English to any beautiful, attractive woman by 1570s. As the name of the most
brilliant planet from late 13c., from this sense in Latin (Old English called it morgensteorra and
&aelig;fensteorra). The venus fly-trap (Dion&aelig;a muscipula) was discovered 1760 by Gov. Arthur
Dobbs in North Carolina and description sent to Collinson in England. The Central Atlantic Coast
Algonquian name for the plant, /titipiwitshik/, yielded regional American English tippity wichity.


