septic (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin septicus of or pertaining to putrefaction, from Greek septikos characterized by
putrefaction, from sepein make rotten or putrid, cause to rot (see sepsis). Septic tank is attested
from 1902.


septicemia (n.)

1857, Modern Latin septic&aelig;mia, from French septicoemi, coined irregularly by French physician
Pierre-Adolphe Piorry (1794-1879) in 1837 from Greek septikos (see septic) + haima blood (see
-emia).    Dr. Piorry, in a second communication, insists upon the fact, that in a great number of
cases the decaying contents of the uterus, and the putrid infection of the blood from this source,
constitute the so-called puerperal fever, and he thinks that the discussion in the Academy is only a
fight about words, as the different speakers agree, without knowing it themselves, upon the nature
of the disease. He proposes the name of septicemia, as best designating the sources of the disease,
viz., from putrid infection from the uterus, and by the respiration of an atmosphere pregnant with
septic particles. ... The admission of this septicemia explains the putrid accidents, as observed in
men, the foetus, and wounded persons during a puerperal epidemic. [E. Noeggerath and A. Jacobi,
Contributions to Midwifery, New York, 1859]


antiseptic (adj.)

1750, coined from anti- against + septic. Figurative use by 1820. As a noun meaning an antiseptic
substance by 1803.


aseptic (adj.)

1859, from a- (2) not + septic. As a noun from 1884.


Listerine (n.)

1879, American English, formulated by Dr. Joseph Lawrence and Jordan Wheat Lambert as a multi-
purpose disinfectant and anti-septic for surgery. In 1895, after it was discovered to kill germs
commonly found in the mouth, the Lambert Company started marketing it as an oral antiseptic. Named
for Joseph Lord Lister (1827-1912), F.R.S., O.M., English surgeon, who revolutionized modern surgery
by applying Pasteur's discoveries and performing the first ever antiseptic surgery in 1865. Lister
objected in vain to the use of his name on the product. Lister (attested from 1286, an Anglian
surname) is from Middle English lit(t)e to dye (see litmus) + fem. suffix -ster, hence, a dyer.


