sere (adj.)

Old English sear dried up, withered, barren, from Proto-Germanic *sauzas (cognates: Middle Low
German sor, Dutch zoor), from PIE root *saus- dry (cognates: Sanskrit susyati dries, withers; Old
Persian u&#353;ka- dry (adj.), land (n.); Avestan hu&#353;ka- dry; Latin sudus dry). A good word now
relegated to bad poetry. Related to sear. Sere month was an old name for August.


sorrel (adj.)

reddish brown, especially of horses, mid-14c., from Old French sorel, from sor yellowish-brown,
probably from Frankish *saur dry, or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *sauza-
(cognates: Middle Dutch soor dry, Old High German soren to become dry, Old English sear withered,
barren; see sere). Perhaps a diminutive form in French.


sear (v.)

Old English searian (intransitive) dry up, to wither, from Proto-Germanic *saurajan (cognates:
Middle Dutch soor dry, Old High German soren become dry), from root of sear dried up, withered (see
sere). Meaning cause to wither is from early 15c. Meaning to brand, to burn by hot iron is recorded
from c.1400, originally especially of cauterizing wounds; figurative use is from 1580s. Related:
Seared; searing.


autumn (n.)

late 14c., autumpne (modern form from 16c.), from Old French autumpne, automne (13c.), from Latin
autumnus (also auctumnus, perhaps influenced by auctus increase), of unknown origin. Perhaps from
Etruscan, but Tucker suggests a meaning drying-up season and a root in *auq- (which would suggest
the form in -c- was the original) and compares archaic English sere-month August.   Harvest was the
English name for the season until autumn began to displace it 16c. In Britain, the season is
popularly August through October; in U.S., September through November. Compare Italian autunno,
Spanish oto&ntilde;o, Portuguese outono, all from the Latin word. Unlike the other three seasons,
its names across the Indo-European languages leave no evidence that there ever was a common word for
it.    Many autumn words mean end, end of summer, or harvest. Compare also Lithuanian ruduo autumn,
from rudas reddish, in reference to leaves; Old Irish fogamar, literally under-winter.


