servile (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin servilis of a slave (as in Servile Wars, name given to the slave revolts in
the late Roman Republic), also slavish, servile, from servus slave (see serve (v.)). Earliest sense
was legal, servile work being forbidden on the Sabbath; sense of cringing, fawning first recorded
c.1600.


servility (n.)

1570s; see servile + -ity.


toady (n.)

servile parasite, 1826, apparently shortened from toad-eater fawning flatterer (1742), originally
(1620s) the assistant of a charlatan, who ate a toad (believed to be poisonous) to enable his master
to display his skill in expelling the poison. The verb is recorded from 1827. Related: Toadied;
toadying.


frank (adj.)

c.1300, free, liberal, generous, from Old French franc free (not servile), sincere, genuine, open,
gracious; worthy (12c.), from Medieval Latin Franc a freeman, a Frank (see Frank). The connection is
that only Franks, as the conquering class, had the status of freemen. Sense of outspoken first
recorded in English 1540s.


boot-licker (n.)

also bootlicker, toady, servile follower, 1846, from boot (n.1) + agent noun from lick (v.). Foot-
licker in the same sense is from 1610s.


Spartacist (n.)

German Bolshevik of November 1918 uprising, 1919, from German Spartakist, from Spartacus (d.71
B.C.E.), Thracian leader of Roman Servile War (73-71 B.C.E.), ultimately from Sparta; the name was
adopted 1916 as a pseudonym by Karl Liebknecht in his political tracts; thence Spartacist for the
socialist revolutionary group he founded with Rosa Luxemburg and Franz Mehring.


liberal arts

late 14c., translating Latin artes liberales; the seven attainments directed to intellectual
enlargement, not immediate practical purpose, and thus deemed worthy of a free man (liberal in this
sense is opposed to servile or mechanical). They were divided into the trivium -- grammar, logic,
rhetoric (see trivial) -- and the quadrivium -- arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy.


Uncle Tom (n.)

servile black man, 1922, somewhat inaccurately in reference to the humble, pious, but strong-willed
main character in Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852). The image implied in the
insult perhaps is more traceable to the late 19c. minstel show versions of the story, which reached
a far wider audience than the book.    I don't recall anyone in the 1920s using the term 'Uncle Tom'
as an epithet. But what's amazing is how fast it caught on (in the 1930s). Black scholars picked up
(the term) and just started throwing it at each other. [Ernest Allen, quoted in Hamilton, Kendra,
The Strange Career of Uncle Tom, Black Issues in Higher Education, June 2002]    As a verb, attested
from 1937.


drudge (n.)

late 15c., one employed in mean, servile, or distasteful work, missing in Old English and Middle
English, unless it is represented by Middle English druggen do menial or monotonous work; druggunge,
mid-13c., which are perhaps from Old English dreogan to work, suffer, endure (see endure). The verb
is from 1540s. Related: Drudged; drudging. The surname is from 13c., probably from Old French dragie
a mixture of grains sown together, thus, a grower of this crop.


base (adj.)

late 14c., low, of little height, from Old French bas low, lowly, mean, from Late Latin bassus
thick, stumpy, low (used only as a cognomen in classical Latin, humilis being there the usual word
for low in stature or position), possibly from Oscan, or Celtic, or related to Greek basson,
comparative of bathys deep. Figurative sense of low in the moral scale is first attested 1530s in
English, earlier servile (1520s). Base metals (c.1600) were worthless in contrast to noble or
precious metals.


lackey (n.)

1520s, footman, running footman, valet, from Middle French laquais foot soldier, footman, servant
(15c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Proven&ccedil;al lacai, from lecai glutton, covetous,
from lecar to lick. Alternative etymology is via French from Catalan alacay, from Arabic al-qadi the
judge. Yet another guess traces it through Spanish lacayo, from Italian lacch&egrave;, from Modern
Greek oulakes, from Turkish ulak runner, courier. This suits the original sense better, but OED says
Italian lacch&egrave; is from French. Sense of servile follower appeared 1580s. As a political term
of abuse it dates from 1939 in communist jargon.


Tom

familiar shortening of masc. proper name Thomas, used by late 14c. as a type of a nickname for a
common man (as in Tom, Dick, and Harry, 1734). Applied 17c. as a nickname for several exceptionally
large bells. Short for Uncle Tom in the sense of black man regarded as too servile to whites is
recorded from 1959. Tom Walker, U.S. Southern colloquial for the devil is recorded from 1833. Tom
and Jerry is first attested 1828 and later used in many extended senses, originally were the names
of the two chief characters (Corinthian Tom and Jerry Hawthorn) in Pierce Egan's Life in London
(1821); the U.S. cat and mouse cartoon characters debuted 1940 in Puss Gets the Boot. Tom Thumb
(1570s) was a miniature man in popular tradition before P.T. Barnum took the name for a dwarf he
exhibited. Tom-tit titmouse is from 1709. Compare tomcat.


sycophant (n.)

1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), informer, talebearer, slanderer, from Middle French sycophante and
directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantes false accuser, slanderer, literally one who
shows the fig, from sykon fig (see fig) + phainein to show (see phantasm). Showing the fig was a
vulgar gesture made by sticking the thumb between two fingers, a display which vaguely resembles a
fig, itself symbolic of a vagina (sykon also meant vulva). The modern accepted explanation is that
prominent politicians in ancient Greece held aloof from such inflammatory gestures, but privately
urged their followers to taunt their opponents. The sense of mean, servile flatterer is first
recorded in English 1570s.    The explanation, long current, that it orig. meant an informer against
the unlawful exportation of figs cannot be substantiated. [OED]


Welsh (adj.)

Old English Wielisc, Wylisc (West Saxon), Welisc, W&aelig;lisc (Anglian and Kentish) foreign;
British (not Anglo-Saxon), Welsh; not free, servile, from Wealh, Walh Celt, Briton, Welshman, non-
Germanic foreigner; in Tolkien's definition, common Gmc. name for a man of what we should call
Celtic speech, but also applied in Germanic languages to speakers of Latin, hence Old High German
Walh, Walah Celt, Roman, Gaulish, and Old Norse Val-land France, Valir Gauls, non-Germanic
inhabitants of France (Danish v&aelig;lsk Italian, French, southern); from Proto-Germanic
*Walkhiskaz, from a Celtic tribal name represented by Latin Volc&aelig; (Caesar) ancient Celtic
tribe in southern Gaul.    As a noun, the Britons, also the Welsh language, both from Old English.
The word survives in Wales, Cornwall, Walloon, walnut, and in surnames Walsh and Wallace. Borrowed
in Old Church Slavonic as vlachu, and applied to the Rumanians, hence Wallachia. Among the English,
Welsh was used disparagingly of inferior or substitute things (such as Welsh cricket louse (1590s);
Welsh comb thumb and four fingers (1796), and compare welch (v.)). Welsh rabbit is from 1725, also
perverted by folk-etymology as Welsh rarebit (1785).


