servitude (n.)

early 15c., condition of being enslaved, from Old French servitude, servitute (13c.) and directly
from Late Latin servitudo slavery, from Latin servus a slave (see serve (v.)) + abstract noun
suffix.


service (n.1)

c.1100, celebration of public worship, from Old French servise act of homage; servitude; service at
table; Mass, church ceremony, from Latin servitium slavery, condition of a slave, servitude, also
slaves collectively, from servus slave (see serve (v.)).    Meaning act of serving, occupation of an
attendant servant is attested from c.1200, as is that of assistance, help; a helpful act. From
c.1300 as provision of food; sequence of dishes served in a meal; from late 14c. as service at
table, attendance during a meal. Meaning the furniture of the table (tea service, etc.) is from mid-
15c.    Meanings state of being bound to undertake tasks for someone or at someone's direction;
labor performed or undertaken for another are mid-13c. Sense of service or employment in a court or
administration is from c.1300, as is that of military service (especially by a knight); employment
as a soldier; hence the military as an occupation (1706).     Also in Middle English sexual
intercourse, conjugal relations (mid-15c.; service of Venus, or flesh's service). Service industry
(as distinct from production) attested from 1938. A service station originally was a gas stop that
also repaired cars.


slavery (n.)

1550s, severe toil, hard work, drudgery; from slave (v.) + -ery. Meaning state of servitude is from
1570s; meaning keeping or holding of slaves is from 1728.


subjection (n.)

late 14c., obedience, submission; servitude, bondage; lordship, control, from Anglo-French
subjectioun, Old French subjection submission; subjugation; inferior condition; captivity (12c.,
Modern French suj&#233;tion), from Latin subjectionem (nominative subjectio) a putting under, noun
of action from past participle stem of subicere (see subject (n.)).


peon (n.)

unskilled worker, 1826, from Mexican Spanish peon agricultural laborer (especially a debtor held in
servitude by his creditor), from Spanish peon day laborer, also pedestrian, originally foot soldier,
from Medieval Latin pedonem foot soldier (see pawn (n.2)). The word entered British English earlier
(c.1600) in the sense native constable, soldier, or messenger in India, via Portuguese peao
pedestrian, foot soldier, day laborer.


thrall (n.)

late Old English &thorn;r&aelig;l bondman, serf, slave, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse
&thorn;r&aelig;ll slave, servant, figuratively wretch, scoundrel, probably from Proto-Germanic
*thrakhilaz, literally runner, from root *threh- to run (cognates: Old High German dregil servant,
properly runner; Old English &thorn;r&aelig;gan, Gothic &thorn;ragjan to run). Meaning condition of
servitude is from early 14c.


yoke (n.)

Old English geoc contrivance for fastening a pair of draft animals, earlier geoht pair of draft
animals (especially oxen), from Proto-Germanic *yukam (cognates: Old Saxon juk, Old Norse ok, Danish
aag, Middle Dutch joc, Dutch juk, Old High German joh, German joch, Gothic juk yoke), from PIE root
*yeug- to join (see jugular). Figurative sense of heavy burden, oppression, servitude was in Old
English.


native (adj.)

late 14c., natural, hereditary, connected with something in a natural way, from Old French natif
native, born in; raw, unspoiled (14c.) and directly from Latin nativus innate, produced by birth,
from natus, past participle of nasci (Old Latin gnasci) be born, related to gignere beget, from PIE
root *gene-/*gen- to give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to familial and tribal groups
(see genus). From late 15c. as born in a particular place. From early 15c. as of one's birth, also
used from mid-15c. in sense of bound; born in servitude or serfdom, also, as a noun a bondsman,
serf. Native American attested from 1956.


robot (n.)

1923, from English translation of 1920 play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots), by Karel Capek
(1890-1938), from Czech robotnik slave, from robota forced labor, compulsory service, drudgery, from
robotiti to work, drudge, from an Old Czech source akin to Old Church Slavonic rabota servitude,
from rabu slave, from Old Slavic *orbu-, from PIE *orbh- pass from one status to another (see
orphan). The Slavic word thus is a cousin to German Arbeit work (Old High German arabeit). According
to Rawson the word was popularized by Karel Capek's play, but was coined by his brother Josef (the
two often collaborated), who used it initially in a short story.


orphan (n.)

c.1300, from Late Latin orphanus parentless child (source of Old French orfeno, Italian orfano),
from Greek orphanos orphaned, without parents, fatherless, literally deprived, from orphos bereft,
from PIE *orbho- bereft of father, also deprived of free status, from root *orbh- to change
allegiance, to pass from one status to another (cognates: Hittite harb- change allegiance, Latin
orbus bereft, Sanskrit arbhah weak, child, Armenian orb orphan, Old Irish orbe heir, Old Church
Slavonic rabu slave, rabota servitude (see robot), Gothic arbja, German erbe, Old English ierfa
heir, Old High German arabeit, German Arbeit work, Old Frisian arbed, Old English earfo&eth;
hardship, suffering, trouble). As an adjective from late 15c.


