severity (n.)

late 15c., austerity or strictness of life, from Middle French severite, from Latin severitas
seriousness, strictness, sternness, from severus stern, strict, serious, of uncertain origin.
Possibly from PIE root *segh- to have, hold (see scheme (n.)), or possibly from *se vero without
kindness, from se without (see secret) + *vero kindness, neuter ablative of verus true (see very).
Meaning strictness in dealing with others is recorded from 1520s.


smartness (n.)

c.1300, severity, from smart (adj.) + -ness. From 1752 as trimness, 1800 as cleverness.


extremely (adv.)

1530s, from extreme + -ly (2). Originally with great severity, later more loosely, in extreme degree
(1570s).


severe (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French severe (12c., Modern French s&eacute;v&egrave;re) or directly from Latin
severus serious, grave, strict, austere (see severity). From 1660s with reference to styles or
tastes; from 1725 of diseases.


third degree (n.)

intense interrogation by police, 1900, probably a reference to Third Degree of master mason in
Freemasonry (1772), the conferring of which included an interrogation ceremony. Third degree as a
measure of severity of burns (most severe) is attested from 1866, from French (1832); in American
English, as a definition of the seriousness of a particular type of crime (the least serious type)
it is recorded from 1865.


tolerant (adj.)

1784, free from bigotry or severity in judging others, from French tol&#233;rant (16c.), and
directly from Latin tolerantem (nom. tolerans), present participle of tolerare to bear, endure,
tolerate (see toleration). Meaning able to bear (something) without being affected is from 1879.
Related: Tolerantly.


acrimony (n.)

1540s, quality of being acrid, from Middle French acrimonie or directly from Latin acrimonia
sharpness, pungency of taste, figuratively acrimony, severity, energy, from acer sharp (fem. acris,
neuter acre; see acrid) + -monia suffix of action, state, condition. Figurative extension to
sharpness of temper is first recorded 1610s.


tolerance (n.)

early 15c., endurance, fortitude (in the face of pain, hardship, etc.), from Old French tolerance
(14c.), from Latin tolerantia a bearing, supporting, endurance, from tolerans, present participle of
tolerare to bear, endure, tolerate (see toleration). Of individuals, with the sense tendency to be
free from bigotry or severity in judging other, from 1765. Meaning allowable amount of variation
dates from 1868; and physiological sense of ability to take large doses first recorded 1875.


Sparta

capital of Laconia in ancient Greece, famed for severity of its social order, the frugality of its
people, the valor of its arms, and the brevity of its speech. Also for dirty boys, men vain of their
long hair, boxing girls, iron money, and insufferable black broth. The name is said to be from Greek
sparte cord made from spartos, a type of broom, from PIE *spr-to-, from root *sper- (2) to turn,
twist (see spiral (adj.)). Perhaps the reference is to the cords laid as foundation markers for the
city. Or the whole thing could be folk etymology.


persevere (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French perseverer continue, persevere, endure and directly from Latin perseverare
continue steadfastly, persist, from persevereus very strict, earnest, from per- very (see per) +
severus strict (see severity). Related: Persevered; persevering.


triage (n.)

1727, action of assorting according to quality, from French triage a picking out, sorting (14c.),
from Old French trier to pick, cull (see try (v.)). There seems to be some influence from or
convergence with Latin tria three (as in triage for coffee beans of the third or lowest quality). In
World War I, adopted for the sorting of wounded soldiers into groups according to the severity of
their injuries, from French use.    First of all, the wounded man, or bless&#233;, is carried into
the first of the so-called Salles de Triage or sorting wards. Here his name and regimental number,
and if he is in condition to give it, the address of his family are taken; .... Then a hasty look-
over from the surgeon sends him into one of the two other Salles de Triage -- that of the Petits
Bless&#233;s if he is only slightly wounded and that of the Grands Bless&#233;s if he is more
severely so. [Woods Hutchinson, M.D., The Doctor in War, Boston, 1918]


