shackle (n.)

Old English sceacel shackle, fetter, probably also in a general sense a link or ring of a chain,
from Proto-Germanic *skakula- (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch schakel link of a chain, ring of a net,
Old Norse sk&ouml;kull pole of a carriage), of uncertain origin. According to OED, the common notion
of something to fasten or attach makes a connection with shake unlikely. Figurative use from early
13c. Related: Shackledom marriage (1771); shackle-bone the wrist (1570s).


shacklebolt (n.)

bolt which passes through the eyes of a shackle, 1680s, from shackle (n.), which has been used
specifically of the bar of a padlock from mid-14c., + bolt (n.).


shackle (v.)

mid-15c., from shackle (n.). Figurative use from 1560s. Related: Shackled; shackling.


pastern (n.)

late 13c., shackle fixed on the foot of a horse or other beast, from Old French pasturon (Modern
French paturon), diminutive of pasture shackle for a horse in pasture, from Vulgar Latin *pastoria,
noun use of fem. of Latin pastorius of herdsmen, from pastor shepherd (see pastor). Metathesis of
-r- and following vowel occurred 1500s. Sense extended (1520s) to part of the leg to which the
tether was attached.


bend (n.2)

broad diagonal band in a coat-of-arms, etc., c.1400, from earlier sense of thin, flat strap for
wrapping round, from Old English bend fetter, shackle, chain, from PIE *bhendh- (see bend (v.)).


catenary (adj.)

1872, from Latin catenarius relating to a chain, from catenanus chained, fettered, from catena
chain, fetter, shackle (see chain (n.)). As a noun from 1788 in mathematics. Related: Catenarian.


impede (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from impediment, or else from Latin impedire impede, be in the way, hinder,
detain, literally to shackle the feet (see impediment). Related: Impeded; impedes; impeding.


impediment (n.)

c.1400, from Latin impedimentem hindrance, from impedire impede, literally to shackle the feet, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)).


constrain (v.)

early 14c., constreyen, from stem of Old French constreindre (Modern French contraindre) restrain,
control, from Latin constringere to bind together, tie tightly, fetter, shackle, chain, from com-
together (see com-) + stringere to draw tight (see strain (v.)). Related: Constrained; constraining.


fetter (n.)

Old English fetor chain or shackle for the feet, from Proto-Germanic *fetero (cognates: Old Saxon
feteros (plural), Middle Dutch veter fetter, in modern Dutch lace, string, Old High German fezzera,
Old Norse fi&ouml;turr, Swedish fj&auml;tter), from PIE root *ped- foot (see foot (n.)). The
generalized sense of anything that shackles had evolved in Old English. Related Fetters.


impeach (v.)

late 14c., to impede, hinder, prevent, from Anglo-French empecher, Old French empeechier hinder
(12c., Modern French emp&ecirc;cher), from Late Latin impedicare to fetter, catch, entangle, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin pedica shackle, from pes (genitive pedis)
foot. Sense of accuse a public officer of misconduct first recorded 1560s, perhaps via confusion
with Latin impetere attack, accuse. Related: Impeached; impeaching.


dispatch (v.)

1510s, to send off in a hurry, from a word in Spanish (despachar expedite, hasten) or Italian
(dispacciare to dispatch). For first element, see dis-. The exact source of the second element has
been proposed as Vulgar Latin *pactare to fasten, fix or *pactiare, or as Latin -pedicare to entrap
(from Latin pedica shackle; see impeach); and the Spanish and Italian words seem to be related to
(perhaps opposites of) Old Proven&ccedil;al empachar impede. See OED for full discussion. Meaning to
get rid of by killing is attested from 1520s. Related: Dispatched; dispatching. As a noun, from
1540s, originally dismissal; sense of a message sent speedily is first attested 1580s.


