shade (v.)

c.1400, to screen from light or heat, from shade (n.). From 1520s as to cast a shadow over;
figurative use in this sense from 1580s. Sense in painting and drawing is from 1797. In reference to
colors, 1819. Related: Shaded; shading.


shade-tree (n.)

1806, from shade (n.) + tree (n.).


shade (n.)

Middle English schade, Kentish ssed, from late Old English scead partial darkness; shelter,
protection, also partly from sceadu shade, shadow, darkness; shady place, arbor, protection from
glare or heat, both from Proto-Germanic *skadwaz (cognates: Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch scade,
Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato, German Schatten, Gothic skadus), from PIE *skot-wo-, from root
*skot- dark, shade (cognates: Greek skotos darkness, gloom, Albanian kot darkness, Old Irish scath,
Old Welsh scod, Breton squeut darkness, Gaelic sgath shade, shadow, shelter).    Figurative use in
reference to comparative obscurity is from 1640s. Meaning a ghost is from 1610s; dramatic (or mock-
dramatic) expression shades of _____ to invoke or acknowledge a memory is from 1818, from the ghost
sense. Meaning lamp cover is from 1780. Sense of window blind first recorded 1845. Meaning cover to
protect the eyes is from 1801. Meaning grade of color first recorded 1680s; that of degree or
gradiation of darkness in a color is from 1680s (compare nuance, from French nue cloud). Meaning
small amount or degree is from 1782.


shades (n.)

sunglasses, 1958, American English, plural of shade (n.).


umbrage (n.)

early 15c., shadow, shade, from Middle French ombrage shade, shadow, from noun use of Latin
umbraticum of or pertaining to shade; being in retirement, neuter of umbraticus of or pertaining to
shade, from umbra shade, shadow, from PIE root *andho- blind, dark (cognates: Sanskrit andha-,
Avestan anda- blind, dark). Many figurative uses in 17c.; main remaining one is the meaning
suspicion that one has been slighted, first recorded 1610s; hence phrase to take umbrage at,
attested from 1670s.


shady (adj.)

affording shade, 1570s; protected by shade, 1590s; from shade (n.) + -y (2). Meaning disreputable
(1862) probably is from earlier university slang sense of of questionable merit, unreliable (1848).
Related: Shadily; shadiness. Old English had sceadlic shady, 'shadely.'


sciamachy (n.)

fighting with shadows, shadow-boxing 1620s, from Greek skiamakhia shadow-fighting, a sham fight but
perhaps literally fighting in the shade (i.e., in school; ancient teachers taught in shaded public
places such as porches and groves), from skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.)) + makhe battle (see
-machy).


shadow (n.)

Old English sceadwe, sceaduwe the effect of interception of sunlight, dark image cast by someone or
something when interposed between an object and a source of light, oblique cases (to the, from the,
of the, in the) of sceadu (see shade (n.)). Shadow is to shade (n.) as meadow is to mead (n.2).
Similar formation in Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch schaeduwe, Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato,
German schatten, Gothic skadus shadow, shade.    From mid-13c. as darkened area created by shadows,
shade. From early 13c. in sense anything unreal; mid-14c. as a ghost; late 14c. as a foreshadowing,
prefiguration. Meaning imitation, copy is from 1690s. Sense of the faintest trace is from 1580s;
that of a spy who follows is from 1859.    As a designation of members of an opposition party chosen
as counterparts of the government in power, it is recorded from 1906. Shadow of Death (c.1200)
translates Vulgate umbra mortis (Ps. xxiii:4, etc.), which itself translates Greek skia thanatou,
perhaps a mistranslation of a Hebrew word for intense darkness. In Beowulf, Gendel is a sceadugenga,
a shadow-goer, and another word for darkness is sceaduhelm. To be afraid of one's (own) shadow be
very timorous is from 1580s.


lamp-shade (n.)

also lampshade, 1829, from lamp + shade (n.).


nuance (n.)

1781, from French nuance slight difference, shade of color (17c.), from nuer to shade, from nue
cloud, from Gallo-Roman *nuba, from Latin nubes a cloud, mist, vapor, from PIE *sneudh- fog
(cognates: Avestan snaoda clouds, Latin obnubere to veil, Welsh nudd fog, Greek nython, in Hesychius
dark, dusky). According to Klein, a reference to the different colors of the clouds.


mocha (n.)

1733, fine coffee, from Mocha, Red Sea port of Yemen, from which coffee was exported. Meaning
mixture of coffee and chocolate first recorded 1849. As a shade of dark brown, it is attested from
1895.


sycamore (n.)

mid-14c., sicamour mulberry-leaved fig tree, from Old French sicamor, sagremore, from Latin
sycomorus, from Greek sykomoros African fig-tree, literally fig-mulberry, from sykon fig (see fig) +
moron  (see mulberry). But according to many sources this is more likely a folk-etymology of Hebrew
shiqmah mulberry.    A Biblical word, originally used for a wide-spreading shade tree with fig-like
fruit (Ficus sycomorus) common in Egypt, Palestine, Syria, etc., whose leaves somewhat resemble
those of the mulberry; applied in English from 1580s to a large species of European maple (also
plane-tree), perhaps because both it and the Biblical tree were notable for their shadiness (the
Holy Family took refuge under a sycamore on the flight to Egypt), and from 1814 to the North
American shade tree that also is called a buttonwood, which was introduced to Europe from Virginia
1637 by Filius Tradescant).    Spelling apparently influenced by sycamine black mulberry tree, which
is from Greek sykcaminos, which also is mentioned in the Bible (Luke xvii:6). For the sake of
clarity, some writers have used the more Hellenic sycomore in reference to the Biblical tree.


scene (n.)

1530s, subdivision of an act of a play, also stage-setting, from Middle French sc&egrave;ne (14c.),
from Latin scaena, scena scene, stage of a theater, from Greek skene wooden stage for actors, also
that which is represented on stage, originally tent or booth, related to skia shadow, shade, via
notion of something that gives shade, from PIE root *skai- to shine, flicker, glimmer (see shine
(v.)).    Meaning material apparatus of a theatrical stage is from 1540s. Meaning place in which the
action of a literary work occurs is attested from 1590s; general (non-literary) sense of place where
anything is done or takes place is recorded from 1590s. Hence U.S. slang sense of setting or milieu
for a specific group or activity, attested from 1951 in Beat jargon. Meaning stormy encounter
between two or more persons is attested from 1761. Behind the scenes having knowledge of affairs not
apparent to the public (1660s) is an image from the theater, amid actors and stage machinery (out of
sight of the audience). Scene of the crime (1923) first attested in Agatha Christie.


nightshade (n.)

Old English nihtscada, literally shade of night, perhaps in allusion to the poisonous berries. A
common Germanic compound, cognates: Dutch nachtschade, German Nachtschatten.


noob (n.)

c.2000 in gamer slang, variant of newbie; often used interchangeably with it, but also often with a
more derogatory shade of meaning; newbies owe their clueless behavior to lack of experience and can
improve, while the fundamental characteristic of noobs is incorrigible obnoxiousness or stupidity.


sunshade (n.)

1842, from sun (n.) + shade (n.). Old English had sunsceadu veil.


sombrero (n.)

1770, from Spanish sombrero broad-brimmed hat, originally umbrella, parasol (a sense found in
English 1590s), from sombra shade, from Late Latin subumbrare (see somber).


yin (n.)

feminine or negative principle in Chinese philosophy, 1670s, from Chinese (Mandarin) yin, said to
mean female, night, lunar, or shade, feminine, the moon. Compare yang. Yin-yang is from 1850.


shed (n.)

building for storage, 1855, earlier light, temporary shelter (late 15c., shadde), possibly a
dialectal variant of a specialized use of shade (n.). Originally of the barest sort of shelter. Or
from or influenced in sense development by Middle English schudde (shud) a shed, hut.


opacity (n.)

1550s, darkness of meaning, obscurity, from French opacit&eacute;, from Latin opacitatem (nominative
opacitas) shade, shadiness, from opacus shaded, dark, opaque (see opaque). The literal sense
condition of being impervious to light first recorded 1630s.


umbra (n.)

1590s, phantom, ghost, a figurative use from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage). Astronomical
sense of shadow cast by the earth or moon during an eclipse is first recorded 1670s. Meaning an
uninvited guest accompanying an invited one is from 1690s in English, from a secondary sense among
the Romans. Related: Umbral.


sciophobia (n.)

fear of shadows, 1977, from scio-, Latinized comb. form of Greek skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.))
+ -phobia. Related: sciophobe; sciophobic.


zombie (n.)

1871, of West African origin (compare Kikongo zumbi fetish; Kimbundu nzambi god), originally the
name of a snake god, later with meaning reanimated corpse in voodoo cult. But perhaps also from
Louisiana creole word meaning phantom, ghost, from Spanish sombra shade, ghost. Sense slow-witted
person is recorded from 1936.


teal (n.)

small freshwater duck, early 14c., of uncertain origin, probably from an unrecorded Old English word
cognate with Middle Dutch teling teal, Middle Low German telink, from West Germanic *taili. As the
name of a shade of dark greenish-blue resembling the color patterns on the fowl's head and wings, it
is attested from 1923 in clothing advertisements.


Ascians (n.)

inhabitants of the torrid zone, who haue the Sunne twice euery yeere in their zenith, and then they
make no shaddowes at all [Nathanael Carpenter, Geographie Delineated forth in Two Bookes, 1635],
from Medieval Latin Ascii, from Greek askioi, from a- not, without, privative prefix (see a- (3)), +
skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.)).


umbrageous (adj.)

shady, 1580s, from French ombrageux, from Old French umbrageus, from umbre shade, from Latin umbra
(see umbrage).


opaque (adj.)

early 15c., opake, from Latin opacus shaded, in the shade, shady, dark, darkened, obscure, of
unknown origin. Spelling influenced after c.1650 by French opaque (c.1500), from the Latin.
Figurative use from 1761. Related: Opaquely; opaqueness.


Manes (pl.)

Gods of the Lower World, in Roman religion, from Latin manes departed spirit, ghost, shade of the
dead, deified spirits of the underworld, usually said to be from Latin manus good, thus properly the
good gods, a euphemistic word, but Tucker suggests a possible connection instead to macer, thus the
thin or unsubstantial ones.


scotoma (n.)

(plural scotomata), 1540s, from Late Latin scotoma, from Greek skotoma dizziness, from skotoun to
darken, from skotos darkness (see shade).


beige (n.)

1858, fine woolen fabric, from dialectal French beige yellowish-gray, brownish-gray, from Old French
bege the natural color of wool and cotton; raw, not dyed (13c.), of obscure origin. Das Wort lebt
namentlich in der Bourgogne und Fr. Comt&eacute;, daneben aber auch im S&uuml;dwesten [Gamillscheg].
As a shade of color, it is attested from 1879. As an adjective by 1879.


sciomancy (n.)

divination by ghostly communication, 1620s, from Modern Latin sciomantia, from scio-, Latinized
comb. form of Greek skia shade, shadow (see shine (v.)) + Latinized form of Greek manteia (see
-mancy).


robin (n.)

common European songbird, 1540s, shortening of Robin Redbreast (mid-15c.), from masc. personal name
Robin, also (in reference to the bird) in the diminutive form robinet. Redbreast alone for the bird
is from early 15c., and the Robin might have been added for the alliteration. It ousted the native
ruddock. In North America, the name was applied to the red-breasted thrush by 1703. Robin's egg as a
shade of blue is attested from 1881.


cast (n.)

mid-13c., a throw, an act of throwing, from cast (v.). In early use especially of dice, hence
figurative uses relating to fortune or fate. Meaning that which is cast is from c.1550s. Meaning
dash or shade of color is from c.1600. The sense of a throw carried an idea of the form the thing
takes after it has been thrown, which led to widespread and varied meanings, such as group of actors
in a play (1630s). OED finds 42 distinct noun meaning and 83 verbal ones, with many sub-definitions.
Many of the figurative senses converged in a general meaning sort, kind, style (mid-17c.). A cast in
the eye (early 14c.) preserves the older verbal sense of warp, turn.


apparition (n.)

c.1500, unclosing (of Heaven), from Anglo-French aparicion, Old French apparition, aparoison (15c.),
used in reference to the Epiphany (revealing of Christ child to the Wise Men), from Late Latin
apparitionem (nominative apparitio) an appearance, also attendants, in classical Latin service,
servants, noun of action from past participle stem of apparere appear (see appear). Meaning ghost
first recorded c.1600; the shade of sense differentiation between appearance and apparition is that
the latter tends to be unexpected or startling.


somber (adj.)

1760 gloomy, shadowy (earlier sombrous, c.1730), from French sombre dark, gloomy, from Old French
sombre (14c.), from an adjective from Late Latin subumbrare to shadow, from sub under (see sub-) +
umbra shade, shadow, perhaps from a suffixed form of PIE *andho- blind, dark (see umbrage). Related:
Somberly; somberness.


umber (n.)

brown earthy pigment, 1560s, from Middle French ombre (in terre d'ombre), or Italian ombra (in terra
di ombra), both from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage) or else from Umbra, fem. of Umber
belonging to Umbria, region in central Italy from which the coloring matter first came (compare
Sienna). Burnt umber, specially prepared and redder in color, is attested from c.1650, distinguished
from raw umber.


cerise (n.)

shade of red, 1858, from French cerise, from rouge-cerise cherry-red, from cerise cherry (see
cherry).


shadow (v.)

Middle English schadowen, Kentish ssedwi, from late Old English sceadwian to protect as with
covering wings (also see overshadow), from the root of shadow (n.). Similar formation in Old Saxon
skadoian, Dutch schaduwen, Old High German scatewen, German (&#252;ber)schatten. From mid-14c. as
provide shade; late 14c. as cast a shadow over (literal and figurative), from early 15c. as darken
(in illustration, etc.). Meaning to follow like a shadow is from c.1600 in an isolated instance; not
attested again until 1872. Related: Shadowed; shadowing.


umbrella (n.)

hand-held portable canopy which opens and folds, c.1600, first attested in Donne's letters, from
Italian ombrello, from Late Latin umbrella, altered (by influence of umbra) from Latin umbella
sunshade, parasol, diminutive of umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage).    A sunshade in the
Mediterranean, a shelter from the rain in England; in late 17c. usage, usually as an Oriental or
African symbol of dignity. Said to have been used by women in England from c.1700; the use of rain-
umbrellas carried by men there traditionally is dated to c.1750, first by Jonas Hathaway, noted
traveler and philanthropist. Figurative sense of authority, unifying quality (usually in a phrase
such as under the umbrella of) is recorded from 1948.


squirrel (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French esquirel, Old French escurueil squirrel; squirrel fur (Modern French
&eacute;cureuil), from Vulgar Latin *scuriolus, diminutive of *scurius squirrel, variant of Latin
sciurus, from Greek skiouros a squirrel, literally shadow-tailed, from skia shadow (see shine (v.))
+ oura tail, from PIE root *ors- buttocks, backside (see arse). Perhaps the original notion is that
which makes a shade with its tail. The Old English word was acweorna, which survived into Middle
English as aquerne.


platinum (n.)

metallic element, 1812, Modern Latin, from Spanish platina platinum, diminutive of plata silver,
from Old French plate or Old Proven&ccedil;al plata sheet of metal (see plate (n.)). The metal looks
like silver, and the Spaniards at first thought it an inferior sort of silver, hence the name
platina. It was first obtained from Spanish colonies in Mexico and Colombia, brought to Europe in
1735, and identified as an element 1741. Taken into English as platina (c.1750), it took its modern
form (with element ending -ium) in 1812, at the time the names of elements were being regularized.
As a shade of blond hair, attested from 1931. As a designation for a recording that has sold at
least one million copies, it is attested from 1971.


shine (v.)

Old English scinan shed light, be radiant, be resplendent, iluminate, of persons, be conspicuous
(class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen), from Proto-Germanic *skinan
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German skinan, Old Norse and Old Frisian skina, Dutch schijnen,
German scheinen, Gothic skeinan to shine, appear), from PIE root *skai- (2) to gleam, shine, flicker
(cognates: Sanskrit chaya brilliance, luster; shadow, Greek skia shade, Old Church Slavonic sinati
to flash up, shine, Albanian he shadow). Transitive meaning to black (boots) is from 1610s. Related:
Shined (in the shoe polish sense), otherwise shone; shining.


