shaving (n.)

act of removing hair with a razor, also thin slice taken off, late 14c., verbal noun from shave
(v.).


shave (n.)

c.1600, something shaved off; from shave (v.); Old English sceafa meant tool for shaving. Meaning
operation of shaving is from 1838. Meaning a grazing touch is recorded from 1834. Phrase a close
shave is from 1856, on notion of a slight, grazing touch.


shaver (n.)

one who shaves, early 15c., agent noun from shave (v.); sense of fellow, chap is slang from 1590s.
Meaning shaving tool is from 1550s. Mad shaver (1610s) was 17c. slang for a swashbuckler, roisterer.


tonsorial (adj.)

pertaining to barbers, 1765, from -al (1) + Latin tonsorius of or pertaining to shearing or shaving,
from tonsor a shaver, barber, shearer, clipper, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear,
shave (see tonsure). Generally used in an attempt at humor. Tonsorious in the same sense is attested
from 1650s.


atelier (n.)

1840, from French atelier workshop, from Old French astelier (carpenter's) workshop, woodpile
(14c.), from astele piece of wood, a shaving, splinter, probably from Late Latin hastella a thin
stick, diminutive of hasta spear, shaft (see yard (n.2)).


soap-dish (n.)

1835 as a dish for a bar of soap; 1814 as a holder for shaving-soap, from soap (n.) + dish (n.).


debauch (v.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;baucher entice from work or duty, from Old French desbaucher to
lead astray, supposedly literally to trim (wood) to make a beam (from bauch beam, from Frankish balk
or some other Germanic source akin to English balk (n.)). A sense of shaving something away,
perhaps, but the root is also said to be a word meaning workshop, which gets toward the notion of to
lure someone off the job; either way the sense evolution is unclear.


tonsure (n.)

late 14c., shaving of the head or part of it, especially as a religious rite, from Anglo-French
tonsure (mid-14c.), Old French tonsure ecclesiastical tonsure; sheep-shearing (14c.), from Latin
tonsura a shearing, clipping, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear, shave, clip, crop,
from PIE *tend-, from root *tem- to cut (see tome). The verb is attested from 1706 (implied in
tonsured). Related: Tonsuring.


clip (v.1)

to cut or sever with a sharp instrument, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse
klippa, Swedish klippa, Danish klippe clip, shear, cut) probably echoic. Related: Clipped; clipping.
Meaning to pronounce short is from 1520s. The verb has a long association with shady activities,
originally especially in reference to cutting or shaving metal from coins (c.1400), but later
extended to swindles from the sense to shear sheep, hence clip-joint place that overcharges
outrageously (1933, American English, a term from Prohibition). To clip (someone's) wings
figuratively (1590s) is from the method of preventing a captive bird from flying.


shave (v.)

Old English sceafan (strong verb, past tense scof, past participle scafen), to scrape, shave,
polish, from Proto-Germanic *skaban (cognates: Old Norse skafa, Middle Dutch scaven, German schaben,
Gothic skaban scratch, shave, scrape), from PIE *skabh-, collateral form of root *(s)kep- to cut, to
scrape, to hack (see scabies). Related: Shaved; shaving. Original strong verb status is preserved in
past tense form shaven. Specifically in reference to cutting the hair close from mid-13c. Figurative
sense of to strip (someone) of money or possessions is attested from late 14c.


beard (n.)

Old English beard beard, from West Germanic *barthaz (cognates: Old Frisian berd, Middle Dutch
baert, Old High German bart, German bart), seemingly from PIE *bhardh-a- beard (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic brada, Lithuanian barzda, and perhaps Latin barba beard).    The Greek and Roman Churches
have long disputed about the beard. While the Romanists have at different times practised shaving,
the Greeks, on the contrary, have strenuously defended the cause of long beards. Leo III. (795 AD)
was the first shaved Pope. Pope Gregory IV., after the lapse of only 30 years, fulminated a Bull
against bearded priests. In the 12th century the prescription of the beard was extended to the
laity. Pope Honorius III. to disguise his disfigured lip, allowed his beard to grow. Henry I. of
England was so much moved by a sermon directed against his beard that he resigned it to the barber.
Frederick Barbarossa is said to have been equally tractable. [Tom Robinson, M.D., Beards, St.
James's Magazine, 1881]    Pubic hair sense is from 1600s (but ne&thorn;ir berd pubic hair is from
late 14c.); in the 1811 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, the phrase beard-splitter is defined as, A
man much given to wenching (see beaver).


spoon (n.)

Old English spon chip, sliver, shaving, splinter of wood, from Proto-Germanic *spe-nu- (cognates:
Old Norse spann, sponn chip, splinter, Swedish sp&#229;n a wooden spoon, Old Frisian spon, Middle
Dutch spaen, Dutch spaan, Old High German span, German Span chip, splinter), from PIE *spe- (2)
long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe spade, also possibly Greek sphen wedge).    As the
word for a type of eating utensil, c.1300 in English (in Old English such a thing might be a
metesticca), in this sense supposed to be from Old Norse sponn, which meant spoon as well as chip,
tile. The eating utensil sense is specific to Middle English and Scandinavian, though Middle Low
German spon also meant wooden spatula. To be born with a silver spoon in one's mouth is from at
least 1719 (Goldsmith, 1765, has: one man is born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another with
a wooden ladle).


