shear (n.)

act of clipping, 1610s, also as a unit of measure of the age of a sheep, from shear (v.). Scientific
and mechanical sense type of strain is from 1850.


shear (v.)

Old English sceran, scieran (class IV strong verb; past tense scear, past participle scoren) to
cleave, hew, cut with a sharp instrument; cut (hair); shear (sheep), from Proto-Germanic *sker- to
cut (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian skera, Dutch scheren, German scheren to shear), from PIE
*(s)ker- (1) to cut, to scrape, to hack (cognates: Sanskrit krnati hurts, wounds, kills, krntati
cuts; Hittite karsh- to cut off; Greek keirein to cut, shear; Latin curtus short; Lithuanian skiriu
to separate; Old Irish scaraim I separate; Welsh ysgar to separate, ysgyr fragment).


shears (n.)

large scissors, Old English scearra (plural) shears, scissors, from Proto-Germanic *sker- to cut
(cognates: Middle Dutch schaer, Old High German scara, German Schere; see shear (v.)). In 17c., also
a device for raising the masts of ships (1620s). As scissors, OED labels it Scottish and dialectal.
Chalk is no shears (1640s) was noted as a Scottish proverb expressing the gap between planning and
doing.


clip (v.1)

to cut or sever with a sharp instrument, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse
klippa, Swedish klippa, Danish klippe clip, shear, cut) probably echoic. Related: Clipped; clipping.
Meaning to pronounce short is from 1520s. The verb has a long association with shady activities,
originally especially in reference to cutting or shaving metal from coins (c.1400), but later
extended to swindles from the sense to shear sheep, hence clip-joint place that overcharges
outrageously (1933, American English, a term from Prohibition). To clip (someone's) wings
figuratively (1590s) is from the method of preventing a captive bird from flying.


corium (n.)

1650s, from Latin corium skin, hide, leather, related to cortex bark, scortum skin, hide, from PIE
root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Sanskrit krtih hide; Old Church Slavonic scora skin, Russian
skora hide, kora bark; Welsh corwg boat made with leather skins; Old English sceran to cut, shear;
see shear (v.)). Related: Coriaceous.


shore (n.)

land bordering a large body of water, c.1300, from an Old English word or from Middle Low German
schor shore, coast, headland, or Middle Dutch scorre land washed by the sea, all probably from
Proto-Germanic *skur-o- cut, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    According to
etymologists originally with a sense of division between land and water. But if the word began on
the North Sea coast of the continent, it might as well have meant originally land 'cut off' from the
mainland by tidal marshes (compare Old Norse skerg an isolated rock in the sea, related to sker to
cut, shear). Old English words for coast, shore were strand (n.), waro&thorn;, ofer. Few Indo-
European languages have such a single comprehensive word for land bordering water (Homer uses one
word for sandy beaches, another for rocky headlands). General application to country near a seacoast
is attested from 1610s.


shorn (adj.)

shaven, late Old English scoren, past participle adjective from shear (v.).


skerry (n.)

isolated rock in the sea, 1610s, from Old Norse sker, related to skera to cut off (see shear (v.)).


sheer (v.)

1620s, deviate from course (of a ship), of obscure origin, perhaps from Dutch scheren to move aside,
withdraw, depart, originally to separate (see shear (v.)). Related: Sheered; shearing. As a noun
from 1660s.


scar (n.2)

bare and broken rocky face of a cliff or mountain, 1670s, earlier rock, crag (14c.), perhaps from
Old Norse sker isolated rock or low reef in the sea, from Proto-Germanic *sker- to cut (see shear
(v.)).


jeer (v.)

1550s, gyr, to deride, to mock, of uncertain origin; perhaps from Dutch gieren to cry or roar, or
German scheren to plague, vex, literally to shear. OED finds the suggestion that it is an ironical
use of cheer plausible and phonetically feasible, ... but ... beyond existing evidence. Related:
Jeered; jeering.


tonsorial (adj.)

pertaining to barbers, 1765, from -al (1) + Latin tonsorius of or pertaining to shearing or shaving,
from tonsor a shaver, barber, shearer, clipper, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear,
shave (see tonsure). Generally used in an attempt at humor. Tonsorious in the same sense is attested
from 1650s.


scarp (n.)

steep slope, 1580s, from Italian scarpa slope, probably from a Germanic source, perhaps Gothic
skarpo pointed object, from Proto-Germanic *skarpa- cutting, sharp (cognates: Middle High German
schroffe sharp rock, crag, Old English scr&aelig;f cave, grave), from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear (v.)).


scorpion (n.)

c.1200, from Old French scorpion (12c.), from Latin scorpionem (nominative scorpio), extended form
of scorpius, from Greek skorpios a scorpion, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). The
Spanish alacran scorpion is from Arabic al-'aqrab.


dreck (n.)

filth, trash, 1922, from Yiddish drek (German dreck), from Middle High German drec, from Proto-
Germanic *threkka (cognates: Old English &thorn;reax rubbish, Old Frisian threkk), perhaps connected
to Greek skatos dung, Latin stercus excrement, from PIE root *(s)ker- to cut (see shear (v.)).


sharn (n.)

Old English scearn dung, muck, from Proto-Germanic *skarnom- (cognates: Old Frisian skern, Old Norse
skarn, Danish skarn), a past participle form from *sker- to cut (see shear). Compare Old English
scearnbudda dung beetle, and Scottish Sharnie a name given to the person who cleans a cow-house
[Jamieson].


scatology (n.)

obscene literature, 1876, with -logy treatise, study + Greek skat-, stem of skor (genitive skatos)
excrement, from PIE *sker- excrement, dung (cognates: Latin stercus dung), literally to cut off; see
shear (v.), and compare shit (v.). Related: Scatological (1886).


scrape (v.)

early 13c., probably from Old Norse skrapa to scrape, erase, from Proto-Germanic *skrapojan
(cognates: Old English scrapian to scrape, Dutch schrapen, German schrappen), from PIE *skerb-,
extension of root *(s)ker- to cut (see shear (v.)). Meaning gather by great effort, collect with
difficulty is from 1540s. Related: Scraped; scraping. To scrape the bottom of the barrel in
figurative sense is from 1942, in reference to U.S. employers facing worker shortages during the
war.


tonsure (n.)

late 14c., shaving of the head or part of it, especially as a religious rite, from Anglo-French
tonsure (mid-14c.), Old French tonsure ecclesiastical tonsure; sheep-shearing (14c.), from Latin
tonsura a shearing, clipping, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear, shave, clip, crop,
from PIE *tend-, from root *tem- to cut (see tome). The verb is attested from 1706 (implied in
tonsured). Related: Tonsuring.


carnage (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French carnage (16c.), from Old Italian carnaggio slaughter, murder, from
Medieval Latin carnaticum flesh, from Latin carnaticum slaughter of animals, from carnem (nominative
caro) flesh, originally a piece of flesh, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). In
English always used more of slaughters of men than beasts. Southey (1795) tried to make a verb of
it.


cut (v.)

late 13c., possibly Scandinavian, from North Germanic *kut- (cognates: Swedish dialectal kuta to
cut, kuta knife, Old Norse kuti knife), or from Old French couteau knife. Replaced Old English
ceorfan (see carve (v.)), sni&thorn;an, and scieran (see shear). Meaning to be absent without excuse
is British university slang from 1794. To cut a pack of cards is from 1590s. Related: Cutting.


scarf (n.2)

connecting joint, late 13c., probably from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse skarfr nail for
fastening a joint, Swedish skarf, Norwegian skarv). A general North Sea Germanic ship-building word
(compare Dutch scherf), the exact relationship of all these is unclear. Also borrowed into Romanic
(French &eacute;cart, Spanish escarba); perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *skarfaz (cognates:
Old English sceorfan to gnaw, bite), from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). Also used as a
verb.


shrub (n.)

Old English scrybb brushwood, shrubbery, a rare and late word (but preserved also, perhaps, in
Shrewsbury), possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Danish skrub brushwood,
Norwegian skrubba dwarf tree). Presumably related to North Frisian skrobb broom plant, brushwood;
West Flemish schrobbe climbing wild pea, with a base notion of rough plant, from PIE *(s)kerb-,
extended form of root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).


share (n.2)

iron blade of a plow, Old English scear, sc&aelig;r plowshare, properly that which cuts, from Proto-
Germanic *skar- (cognates: Old Frisian skere, Middle Low German schar, Old High German scar, German
Schar, Dutch ploegschaar, Middle High German pfluocschar), from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear).


cenacle (n.)

c.1400, from Old French cenacle, variant of cenaille (14c., Modern French c&eacute;nacle), from
Latin cenaculum dining room, from cena mid-day meal, afternoon meal, literally portion of food, from
PIE *kert-sna-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). Latin cenaculum was used in the
Vulgate for the upper room where the Last Supper was eaten.


scurf (n.)

late Old English sceorf, from Proto-Germanic *skurf- (cognates: Danish skurv, Middle Dutch scorf,
Dutch schurft, Old High German scorf, German Schorf scurf), probably related to Old English sceorfan
to gnaw, scearfian to cut into shreds, from PIE *skerp-, from root *(s)ker- to cut (see shear (v.)).


scabbard (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French *escauberc sheath, vagina (13c.), from Frankish or another Germanic
source, from Proto-Germanic *sker-berg-, literally sword-protector, from *skar blade (source also of
Old High German scar scissors, blade, sword, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut; see shear (v.)) + *berg-
protect (source also of Old High German bergan to protect; see bury).


shard (n.)

also sherd, Old English sceard incision, cleft, gap; potshard, a fragment, broken piece, from Proto-
Germanic *skardas (cognates: Middle Dutch schaerde a fragment, a crack, Dutch schaard a flaw, a
fragment, German Scharte a notch, Danish skaar chink, potsherd), a past participle from the root of
Old English sceran to cut (see shear). Meaning fragment of broken earthenware developed in late Old
English. Used late 14c. as scale of a dragon. French &eacute;charde prickle, splinter is a Germanic
loan-word.


shred (n.)

Old English screade piece cut off, cutting, scrap, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Old
Frisian skred a cutting, clipping, Middle Dutch schroode shred, Middle Low German schrot piece cut
off, Old High German scrot, scrap, shred, a cutting, piece cut off, German Schrot log, block, small
shot, Old Norse skrydda shriveled skin), from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool, extension of root
*(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).


strigil (n.)

ancient tool for scraping the skin after a bath, 1580s, from Latin strigilis scraper, horse-comb,
from stringere (1) draw along a surface, graze, touch lightly; strip off, pluck off, cut away; clip,
prune; lay bare, unsheathe, figuratively waste, consume, reduce; touch, move, affect, cause pain,
from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Latin striga stroke, strike, furrow, stria
furrow, channel; Old Church Slavonic striga shear; Old English stracian to stroke; German streichen
to stroke, rub). Etymologists dispute over whether this is connected to Latin stringere (2), root of
strain (v.).


skirmish (n.)

late 14c., from Old French escarmouche skirmish, from Italian scaramuccia, earlier schermugio,
probably from a Germanic source (compare Old High German skirmen to protect, defend), with a
diminutive or depreciatory suffix, from Proto-Germanic *skerm-, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear (v.)).    Influenced in Middle English by a separate verb skirmysshen to brandish a weapon,
from Old French eskirmiss-, stem of eskirmir to fence, from Frankish *skirmjan, from the same
Germanic source. Compare scrimmage. Other modern Germanic forms have an additional diminutive affix:
German scharm&#252;tzel, Dutch schermutseling, Danish skj&#230;rmydsel. Skirmish-line attested by
1864.


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


share (n.1)

portion, Old English scearu a cutting, shearing, tonsure; a part or division, related to sceran to
cut, from Proto-Germanic *skaro- (cognates: Old High German scara troop, share of forced labor,
German Schar troop, band, properly a part of an army, Old Norse sk&ouml;r rim), from PIE root
*(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    Meaning part of the capital of a joint stock company is
first attested c.1600. Share and share alike attested from 1560s. The same Old English noun in the
sense division led to an obsolete noun share fork ('division') of the body at the groin; pubic
region (late Old English and Middle English); hence share-bone pubis (early 15c.).


shirt (n.)

Old English scyrte skirt, tunic, from Proto-Germanic *skurtjon a short garment (cognates: Old Norse
skyrta, Swedish skjorta skirt, kirtle; Middle Dutch scorte, Dutch schort apron; Middle High German
schurz, German Schurz apron), related to Old English  scort, sceort short, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to
cut (see shear (v.)).    Formerly of the chief garment worn by both sexes, but in modern use long
only of that for men; in reference to women's tops, reintroduced 1896. Bloody shirt, exposed as a
symbol of outrage, is attested from 1580s. To give (someone) the shirt off one's back is from 1771.
To lose one's shirt suffer total financial loss is from 1935. To keep one's shirt on be patient
(1904) is from the notion of (not) stripping down for a fight.


fight (v.)

Old English feohtan to fight (class III strong verb; past tense feaht, past participle fohten), from
Proto-Germanic *fehtan (cognates: Old High German fehtan, German fechten, Middle Dutch and Dutch
vechten, Old Frisian fiuhta to fight), from PIE *pek- (2) to pluck out (wool or hair), apparently
with a notion of pulling roughly (cognates: Greek pekein to comb, shear, pekos fleece, wool; Persian
pashm wool, down, Latin pectere to comb, Sanskrit paksman- eyebrows, hair).    Spelling substitution
of -gh- for a hard H sound was a Middle English scribal habit, especially before -t-. In some late
Old English examples, the middle consonant was represented by a yogh. To fight back resist is
recorded from 1890.


screen (n.)

mid-14c., upright piece of furniture providing protection from heat of a fire, drafts, etc.,
probably from a shortened (Anglo-French? compare Anglo-Latin screna) variant of Old North French
escren, Old French escran fire-screen (early 14c.), perhaps from Middle Dutch scherm screen, cover,
shield, or Frankish *skrank barrier, from Proto-Germanic *skerm- (cognates: Old High German skirm,
skerm protection, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    Meaning net-wire frame used in
windows and doors is recorded from 1859. Meaning flat vertical surface for reception of projected
images is from 1810, originally in reference to magic lantern shows; later of movies. Transferred
sense of cinema world collectively is attested from 1914; hence screen test (1918), etc. Screen
saver first attested 1990. Screen printing recorded from 1918.


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


sharp (adj.)

Old English scearp having a cutting edge; pointed; intellectually acute, active, shrewd; keen (of
senses); severe; biting, bitter (of tastes), from Proto-Germanic *skarpaz, literally cutting
(cognates: Old Saxon scarp, Old Norse skarpr, Old Frisian skerp, Dutch scherp, German scharf sharp),
from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Lettish skarbs sharp, Middle Irish cerb cutting; see shear
(v.)).    The figurative meaning acute or penetrating in intellect or perception was in Old English;
hence keenly alive to one's own interests, quick to take advantage (1690s). Of words or talk,
cutting, sarcastic, from early 13c. Meaning distinct in contour is from 1670s. The adverbial meaning
abruptly is from 1836; that of promptly is first attested 1840. The musical meaning half step above
(a given tone) is from 1570s. Meaning stylish is from 1944, hepster slang, from earlier general
slang sense of excellent (1940). Phrase sharp as a tack first recorded 1912 (sharp as a needle has
been around since Old English). Sharp-shinned attested from 1704 of persons, 1813 of hawks.


script (n.)

late 14c., something written, earlier scrite (c.1300), from Old French escrit piece of writing,
written paper; credit note, IOU; deed, bond (Modern French &eacute;crit) from Latin scriptum a
writing, book; law; line, mark, noun use of neuter past participle of scribere to write, from PIE
*skribh- to cut, separate, sift (cognates: Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline, sketch,
Lettish skripat scratch, write, Old Norse hrifa scratch), from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)) on the notion of carving marks in stone, wood, etc.    Meaning handwriting is recorded from
1860. Theatrical use, short for manuscript, is attested from 1884. The importance of Rome to the
spread of civilization in Europe is attested by the fact that the word for write in Celtic and
Germanic (as well as Romanic) languages derives from scribere (French &eacute;crire, Irish
scriobhaim, Welsh ysgrifennu, German schreiben). The cognate Old English scrifan means to allot,
assign, decree (see shrive; also compare Old Norse skript penance) and Modern English uses write
(v.) to express this action.


screw (n.)

cylinder of wood or metal with a spiral ridge round it; hole in which a screw turns, c.1400, from
Middle French escroue nut, cylindrical socket, screwhole, of uncertain etymology; not found in other
Romanic languages. Perhaps via Gallo-Roman *scroba or West Germanic *scruva from Vulgar Latin
scrobis screw-head groove, in classical Latin ditch, trench, also vagina (Diez, though OED finds
this phonologically impossible).    Kluge, Watkins and others trace it to Latin scrofa breeding sow,
perhaps based on the shape of a pig's penis (compare Portuguese porca, Spanish perca a female screw,
from Latin porca sow). Latin scrofa is literally digger, rooter, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut
(see shear (v.)). A group of apparently cognate Germanic words (Middle Low German, Middle Dutch
schruve, Dutch schroef, German Schraube, Swedish skrufva screw) are said to be French loan-words.
Sense of means of pressure or coercion is from 1640s, probably in reference to instruments of
torture (such as thumbscrews). Meaning prison guard, warden is 1812 in underworld slang, originally
in reference to the key they carried (screw as slang for key attested from 1795). Slang meaning an
act of copulation is recorded from 1929 (meaning a prostitute is attested from 1725). To have a
screw loose have a dangerous (usually mental) weakness is recorded from 1810.


shit (v.)

Old English scitan, from Proto-Germanic *skit- (cognates: North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten,
German scheissen), from PIE *skei- to cut, split, divide, separate (see shed (v.)). The notion is of
separation from the body (compare Latin excrementum, from excernere to separate, Old English scearn
dung, muck, from scieran to cut, shear; see sharn). It is thus a cousin to science and conscience.
<b>Shit is not an acronym</b>. The notion that it is a recent word might be partly because it was
taboo from c.1600 and rarely appeared in print (neither Shakespeare nor the KJV has it), and even in
vulgar publications of the late 18c. it is disguised by dashes. It drew the wrath of censors as late
as 1922 (Ulysses and The Enormous Room), scandalized magazine subscribers in 1957 (a Hemingway story
in Atlantic Monthly) and was omitted from some dictionaries as recently as 1970 (Webster's New
World).    Extensive slang usage; meaning to lie, to tease is from 1934; that of to disrespect is
from 1903. Shite, now a jocular or slightly euphemistic and chiefly British variant of the noun,
formerly a dialectal variant, reflects the vowel in the Old English verb (compare German scheissen);
the modern verb has been influenced by the noun. Shat is a humorous past tense form, not
etymological, first recorded 18c. To shit bricks be very frightened attested by 1961. The connection
between fear and involuntary defecation has generated expressions since 14c., and probably also is
behind scared shitless (1936).


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


