sheathe (v.)

c.1400, to furnish (a sword, etc.) with a sheath, from sheath; meaning to put (a sword, etc.) in a
sheath is attested from early 15c. Related: Sheathed; sheathing.


unsheathe (v.)

late 14c., from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + sheathe (v.). Related: Unsheathed; unsheathing.


fur (n.)

late 14c. trimming or lining of a garment (implied c.1300 in surname Furhode fur hood), probably
from Old French fourrer to line, sheathe, from fuerre sheath, covering, from Frankish *fodr or
another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *fodram sheath (cognates: Old Frisian foder coat
lining, Old High German fotar a lining, German Futter, Gothic fodr sword sheath).    Sense
transferred in English from the notion of a lining to the thing used in it. First applied early 15c.
to animal hair still on the animal.  I'le make the fur Flie 'bout the eares of the old Cur. [Butler,
Hudibras, 1663]  As a verb, from c.1300, from Old French fourrer. Related: Furred; furring.


clitoris (n.)

erectile organ of female mammals, 1610s, coined in Modern Latin from Late Greek kleitoris, a
diminutive, but the exact sense intended by the coiners is uncertain. Perhaps from Greek kleiein to
sheathe, also to shut, in reference to its being covered by the labia minora. The related Greek noun
form kleis has a second meaning of a key, a latch or hook (to close a door); see close (v.), and
compare slot (n.2).    Alternatively, perhaps related to Greek kleitys, a variant of klitys side of
a hill, itself related to klinein to slope, from the same root as climax (see lean (v.)), and with a
sense of little hill. Some ancient medical sources give a supposed Greek verb kleitoriazein to touch
or titillate lasciviously, to tickle (compare German slang der Kitzler clitoris, literally the
tickler), but the verb is likely from the anatomy in this case.    The anatomist Mateo Renaldo
Colombo (1516-1559), professor at Padua, claimed to have discovered it (De re anatomica, 1559, p.
243). He called it amor Veneris, vel dulcedo the love or sweetness of Venus. It had been known
earlier to women.


