sheaf (n.)

Old English sceaf (plural sceafas) large bundle of corn, from Proto-Germanic *skauf- (cognates: Old
Saxon scof, Middle Dutch scoof, Dutch schoof, Old High German scoub sheaf, bundle, German Schaub
sheaf; Old Norse skauf fox's tail; Gothic skuft hair on the head, German Schopf tuft), from PIE root
*(s)keup- cluster, tuft, hair of the head. Extended to bundles of things other than grain by c.1300.
Also used in Middle English for two dozen arrows. General sense of a collection is from 1728.


sheave (v.)

to gather up in sheaves, 1570s; see sheaf. Related: Sheaved; sheaving. Earlier verb in this sense
was simply sheaf (c.1500).


Gomorrah

Biblical site, from Hebrew 'omer sheaf (of corn, etc.), probably a reference to the fertility of the
region.


grip (n.)

fusion of Old English gripe grasp, clutch and gripa handful, sheaf (see grip (v.)). Meaning stage
hand is from 1888, from their work shifting scenery.


Sheffield

manufacturing city in Yorkshire, noted for cutlery and metalwork since at least 14c. The name is
from late Old English Scafeld Open Land by the River Sheaf, an Old English river name, perhaps from
scea&#240; boundary.


manipulation (n.)

c.1730, a method of digging ore, from French manipulation, from manipule handful (a pharmacists'
measure), from Latin manipulus handful, sheaf, bundle, from manus hand (see manual) + root of plere
to fill (see pleio-). Sense of skillful handling of objects is first recorded 1826; extended 1828 to
handling of persons as well as objects.


truckle (n.)

small wheel or roller, late 14c., from Anglo-French trocle, from Latin trochlea a small wheel, sheaf
of a pulley, from Greek trokhileia a system of pulleys, from trokhos wheel, from trekhein to run,
from PIE root *dhregh- to run (cognates: Old Irish droch wheel, Lithuanian pa-drosti to run fast).
Truckle bed small bed on wheels that can be stowed under a larger bed is from mid-15c.


garbage (n.)

early 15c., giblets of a fowl, waste parts of an animal, later confused with garble in its sense of
siftings, refuse. Perhaps some senses derive from Old French garbe a bundle of sheaves, entrails,
from Proto-Germanic *garba- (cognates: Dutch garf, German garbe sheaf), from PIE *ghrebh- (1) to
seize, reach (see grab (v.)). Sense of refuse, filth is first attested 1580s; used figuratively for
worthless stuff from 1590s. Garbology study of waste as a social science is from 1976.


grab (v.)

1580s, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grabben to grab, from Proto-Germanic *grab (cognates:
Old English gr&aelig;ppian to seize, Old Saxon garva, Old High German garba sheaf, literally that
which is gathered up together), from PIE *ghrebh- to seize, reach (cognates: Sanskrit grbhnati
seizes, Old Persian grab- seize as possession or prisoner, Old Church Slavonic grabiti to seize,
rob, Lithuanian grebiu to rake). Sense of to get by unscrupulous methods reinforced by grab game, a
kind of swindle, attested from 1846. Related: Grabbed; grabbing.


