shed (n.)

building for storage, 1855, earlier light, temporary shelter (late 15c., shadde), possibly a
dialectal variant of a specialized use of shade (n.). Originally of the barest sort of shelter. Or
from or influenced in sense development by Middle English schudde (shud) a shed, hut.


shed (v.)

cast off, Old English sceadan, scadan to divide, separate, part company; discriminate, decide;
scatter abroad, cast about, strong verb (past tense scead, past participle sceadan), from Proto-
Germanic *skaithan (cognates: Old Saxon skethan, Old Frisian sketha, Middle Dutch sceiden, Dutch
scheiden, Old High German sceidan, German scheiden part, separate, distinguish, Gothic skaidan
separate), from *skaith divide, split.    According to Klein's sources, this probably is related to
PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide, part, split (cognates: Sanskrit chid-, Greek skhizein,
Latin scindere to split; Lithuanian skedzu I make thin, separate, divide; Old Irish scian knife;
Welsh chwydu to break open). Related: Shedding. A shedding-tooth (1799) was a milk-tooth or baby-
tooth.     In reference to animals, to lose hair, feathers, etc. recorded from c.1500; of trees
losing leaves from 1590s; of clothes, 1858. This verb was used in Old English to gloss Late Latin
words in the sense to discriminate, to decide that literally mean to divide, separate (compare
discern). Hence also scead (n.) separation, distinction; discretion, understanding, reason;
sceadwisnes discrimination, discretion.


hangar (n.)

1852, shed for carriages, from French hangar shed, probably from Middle French hanghart (14c.),
perhaps an alteration of Middle Dutch *ham-gaerd enclosure near a house [Barnhart], or from Medieval
Latin angarium shed in which horses are shod [Gamillscheg, Klein]. Sense of covered shed for
airplanes first recorded in English 1902, from French use in that sense.


hovel (n.)

mid-14c., roofed passage, vent for smoke, later shed for animals (mid-15c.), of unknown origin.
Meaning shed for human habitation; rude or miserable cabin is from 1620s. It also sometimes meant
canopied niche for a statue or image (mid-15c.).


woodshed (n.)

shed for keeping wood as fuel, 1799, from wood (n.) + shed (n.). Sometimes a euphemism for outhouse.
Figuratively, as the place for private punishment, by 1907, American English colloquial.


bloodshed (n.)

also blood-shed, c.1500, the shedding of (one's) blood, from verbal phrase (attested in late Old
English), from blood (n.) + shed (v.). The sense of slaughter is much older (early 13c., implied in
bloodshedding).


watershed (n.)

line separating waters flowing into different rivers, 1803, from water (n.1) + shed in a
topographical sense of ridge of high ground between two valleys or lower ground, a divide, perhaps
from shed (v.) in its extended noun sense of the part of the hair of the head (14c.). Perhaps a
loan-translation of German Wasser-scheide. Figurative sense is attested from 1878. Meaning ground of
a river system is from 1878.


molt (v.)

also moult, mid-14c., mouten, of feathers, to be shed, from Old English *mutian to change (in
bemutian to exchange), from Latin mutare to change (see mutable). Transitive sense, of birds, to
shed feathers is first attested 1520s. With parasitic -l-, late 16c., on model of fault, etc.
Related: Molted, moulted; molting, moulting. As a noun from 1815.


shop (n.)

c.1300, booth or shed for trade or work, perhaps from Old English scoppa, a rare word of uncertain
meaning, apparently related to scypen cowshed, from Proto-Germanic *skoppan small additional
structure (cognates: Old High German scopf building without walls, porch, German dialectal Scopf
porch, cart-shed, barn, German Schuppen a shed), from root *skupp-. Or the Middle English word was
acquired from Old French eschoppe booth, stall (Modern French &#233;choppe), which is a Germanic
loan-word from the same root.    Meaning building or room set aside for sale of merchandise is from
mid-14c. Meaning schoolroom equipped for teaching vocational arts is from 1914, American English.
Sense of matters pertaining to one's trade is from 1814 (as in talk shop (v.), 1860).


tavern (n.)

late 13c., wine shop, later public house (mid-15c.), from Old French taverne (mid-13c.) shed made of
boards, booth, stall, also tavern, inn, from Latin taberna shop, inn, tavern, originally hut, shed,
rude dwelling, possibly [Klein] by dissimilation from *traberna, from trabs (genitive trabis) beam,
timber, from PIE *treb- dwelling (cognates: Lithuanian troba a building, Old Welsh treb house,
dwelling, Welsh tref a dwelling, Irish treb residence, Old English &eth;orp village, hamlet, farm,
estate).


schedule (n.)

late 14c., sedule, cedule ticket, label, slip of paper with writing on it, from Old French cedule
(Modern French c&#233;dule), from Late Latin schedula strip of paper (in Medieval Latin also a note,
schedule), diminutive of Latin scheda, scida one of the strips forming a papyrus sheet, from Greek
skhida splinter, from stem of skhizein to cleave, split (see shed (v.)). Also from the Latin word
are Spanish c&#233;dula, German Zettel.    The notion is of slips of paper attached to a document as
an appendix (a sense maintained in U.S. tax forms). The specific meaning printed timetable is first
recorded 1863 in railway use. Modern spelling is a 15c. imitation of Latin, but pronunciation
remained sed-yul for centuries afterward; the modern British pronunciation (shed-yul) is from French
influence, while the U.S. pronunciation (sked-yul) is from the practice of Webster, based on the
Greek original.


outhouse (n.)

early 14c., shed, outbuilding, from out + house (n.). Sense of a privy (principally American
English) is first attested 1819.


byre (n.)

cow-shed, Old English byre, perhaps related to bur cottage, dwelling, house (see bower).


roundhouse (n.)

also round-house, lock-up, place of detention, 1580s, from Dutch rondhuis guardhouse.  Meaning
circular shed for locomotives with a turntable in the center is from 1856. Meaning blow delivered
with a wide sweep of the arm is perhaps extended from round building for circular machinery.


undress (v.)

1590s, to shed one's clothing, from un- (2) opposite of + dress (v.). Transitive sense of to strip
off (someone's) clothing is recorded from 1610s. Related: Undressed; undressing.


lighten (v.2)

shed light upon, illuminate, brighten, early 14c., from light (n.) -en (1). Meaning to grow brighter
is late 14c. Of faces, expressions, etc., from 1795. Related: Lightened; lightening.


defoliation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin defoliare shed leaves, from de- (see
de-) + folium leaf (see folio).


gore (n.1)

Old English gor dirt, dung, filth, shit, a Germanic word (cognates: Middle Dutch goor filth, mud;
Old Norse gor cud; Old High German gor animal dung), of uncertain origin. Sense of clotted blood
(especially shed in battle) developed by 1560s.


slough (v.)

to cast off (as the skin of a snake or other animal), 1720, originally of diseased tissue, from
Middle English noun slough shed skin of a snake (see slough (n.)). Related: Sloughed; sloughing.


illustrate (v.)

1520s, light up, shed light on; 1610s, educate by means of examples, back-formation from
illustration, and in some cases from Latin illustratus, past participle of illustrare (see
illustration). Sense of provide pictures to explain or decorate is 1630s. Related: Illustrated;
illustrating.


rescind (v.)

1630s, from French rescinder cut off, cancel (15c.), and directly from Latin rescindere to cut off,
tear off, abolish, from re- back (see re-) + scindere to cut, split (see shed (v.)). Related:
Rescinded; rescinding.


scission (n.)

act of cutting or dividing, mid-15c., from French scission (14c.), from Late Latin scissionem
(nominative scissio) a cleaving, dividing, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
scindere to cut (see shed (v.)).


skive (v.1)

split or cut into strips, pare off, grind away, 1825, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
skifa to cut, split, from Proto-Germanic *skif-, from Proto-Indo-European *skei- to cut, split (see
shed (v.)). Related: Skived; skiving.


schizo-

word-forming element meaning division; split, cleavage, from Latinized form of Greek skhizo-, comb.
form of skhizein to split, cleave, part, separate, from PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide,
part, split (see shed (v.)).


tear (v.2)

early 15c., shed tears, 1650s, fill with tears mainly in American English, from tear (n.1). Related:
Teared; tearing. Old English verb t&aelig;herian, tearian to weep did not survive into Middle
English.


skene (n.)

ancient type of Celtic dagger found in Ireland, double-edged and leaf-like, 1520s, from Irish Gaelic
scian (genitive sceine) knife, cognate with Gaelic sgian knife, Welsh ysgien a slicer, from PIE
*skiy-ena-, from root *skei- to divide, split (see shed (v.)).


feeble (adj.)

late 12c., from Old French feble (12c., Modern French faible) weak, feeble, from Latin flebilis
lamentable, literally that is to be wept over, from flere weep, cry, shed tears, lament, from PIE
*bhle- to howl (see bleat). The first -l- was dropped in Old French by dissimilation. The noun
meaning feeble person is recorded from mid-14c.


shin (n.)

Old English scinu shin, fore part of the lower leg, from Proto-Germanic *skino thin piece (cognates:
Dutch scheen, Old High German scina, German Schienbein shin, shinbones), from PIE root *skei- to
cut, split (see shed (v.)). Shin splints is attested from 1930.


abscissa (n.)

1690s, from Latin abscissa (linea) (a line) cut off, from fem. past participle of abscindere to cut
off, from ab- off, away (see ab-) + scindere to cut (see shed (v.)).


cubbyhole (n.)

1825, the first element possibly from a diminutive of cub stall, pen, cattle shed, coop, hutch
(1540s), a dialect word with apparent cognates in Low German (such as East Frisian kubbing, Dutch
kub). Or related to cuddy small room, cupboard (1793), originally small cabin in a boat (1650s),
from Dutch kajuit, from French cahute. Or perhaps simply a children's made-up word.


cove (n.1)

early 14c., den, cave, from Old English cofa small chamber, cell, from Proto-Germanic *kubon
(compare Old High German kubisi tent, hut, German Koben pigsty, Old Norse kofi hut, shed). Extension
of meaning to small bay is 1580s, apparently via Scottish dialectal meaning small hollow place in
coastal rocks (a survival of an Old English secondary sense).


schist (n.)

type of layered metamorphic rock, 1795 (earlier schistus, c.1600), from French schiste (16c.), from
Latin schistos lapis stone that splits easily (Pliny), from Greek skhistos divided, separated, from
skhizein to split (see shed (v.)). The rock splits easily in layers. Liddell &amp; Scott say Greek
skhistos lithos was probably talc.


schism (n.)

late 14c., scisme, dissention within the church, from Old French scisme, cisme a cleft, split
(12c.), from Church Latin schisma, from Greek skhisma (genitive skhismatos) division, cleft, in New
Testament applied metaphorically to divisions in the Church (I Cor. xii.25), from stem of skhizein
to split (see shed (v.)). Spelling restored 16c., but pronunciation unchanged. Often in reference to
the Great Schism (1378-1417) in the Western Church.


cobalt (n.)

1680s, from German kobold household goblin, Harz Mountains silver miners' term for rock laced with
arsenic and sulfur (so called because it degraded the ore and made the miners ill), from Middle High
German kobe hut, shed + *holt goblin, from hold gracious, friendly, a euphemistic word for a
troublesome being. The metallic element was extracted from this rock. It was known to Paracelsus,
but discovery is usually credited to the Swede George Brandt (1733), who gave it the name. Extended
to a blue color 1835 (a mineral containing it had been used as a blue coloring for glass since
16c.). Compare nickel.


grange (n.)

small farm, mid-15c.; mid-13c. in place names (and compare granger), from Anglo-French graunge, Old
French grange barn, granary; farmstead, farm house (12c.), from Medieval Latin or Vulgar Latin
granica barn or shed for keeping grain, from Latin granum grain (see corn (n.1)). Sense evolved to
outlying farm (late 14c.), then country house (1550s). Meaning local lodge of the Patrons of
Husbandry (a U.S. agricultural interest promotion organization) is from 1867.


shiver (n.1)

small piece, splinter, fragment, chip, c.1200, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English word, related
to Middle Low German schever schiver splinter, Old High German scivero, from Proto-Germanic *skif-
split (cognates: Old High German skivaro splinter, German Schiefer splinter, slate), from PIE *skei-
to cut, split (see shed (v.)). Commonly in phrases to break to shivers break into bits (mid-15c.).
Also, shiver is still dialectal for a splinter in Norfolk and Lincolnshire.


sheath (n.)

Old English scea&eth;, sc&aelig;&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *skaithiz (cognates: Old Saxon scethia,
Old Norse skei&eth;ir (plural), Old Frisian skethe, Middle Dutch schede, Dutch schede, Old High
German skaida, German scheide a sheath, scabbard), according to OED, possibly from root *skei-
divide, split (see shed (v.)) on notion of a split stick with the sword blade inserted. Meaning
condom is recorded from 1861; sense of close-fitting dress or skirt is attested from 1904.


ski (n.)

1883 (there is an isolated instance from 1755; in early use often spelled skee), from Norwegian ski,
related to Old Norse ski&eth; long snowshoe, literally stick of wood, firewood, cognate with Old
English scid stick of wood, obsolete English shide piece of wood split off from timber; Old High
German skit, German Scheit log, from Proto-Germanic *skid- to divide, split, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, split (see shed (v.)). Ski-jumper is from 1894; ski bum first attested 1960; ski-mask is from
1963; noted as part of criminal disguises from 1968.


weep (v.)

Old English wepan shed tears, cry; bewail, mounr over; complain (class VII strong verb; past tense
weop, past participle wopen), from Proto-Germanic *wopjan (cognates: Old Norse op, Old High German
wuof shout, shouting, crying, Old Saxon wopian, Gothic wopjan to shout, cry out, weep), from PIE
*wab- to cry, scream (cognates: Latin vapulare to be flogged; Old Church Slavonic vupiti to call,
vypu gull). Of water naturally forming on stones, walls, etc., from c.1400. Related: Wept; weeping;
weeper.


roof (n.)

Old English hrof roof, ceiling, top, summit; heaven, sky, also figuratively, highest point of
something, from Proto-Germanic *khrofam (cognates: Old Frisian rhoof roof, Middle Dutch roof, rouf
cover, roof, Dutch roef deckhouse, cabin, coffin-lid, Middle High German rof penthouse, Old Norse
hrof boat shed).    No apparent connections outside Germanic. English alone has retained the word in
a general sense, for which the other languages use forms corresponding to OE. &thorn;&aelig;c thatch
[OED]. Roof of the mouth is from late Old English. Raise the roof create an uproar is attested from
1860, originally in U.S. Southern dialect.


shine (v.)

Old English scinan shed light, be radiant, be resplendent, iluminate, of persons, be conspicuous
(class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen), from Proto-Germanic *skinan
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German skinan, Old Norse and Old Frisian skina, Dutch schijnen,
German scheinen, Gothic skeinan to shine, appear), from PIE root *skai- (2) to gleam, shine, flicker
(cognates: Sanskrit chaya brilliance, luster; shadow, Greek skia shade, Old Church Slavonic sinati
to flash up, shine, Albanian he shadow). Transitive meaning to black (boots) is from 1610s. Related:
Shined (in the shoe polish sense), otherwise shone; shining.


lachrymose (adj.)

1660s, tear-like, from Latin lacrimosus tearful, sorrowful, weeping, also causing tears, lamentable,
from lacrima tear, a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma tear, from dakryein to shed tears,
from dakry tear, from PIE *dakru- (see tear (n.1)). Meaning given to tears, tearful is first
attested 1727; meaning of a mournful character is from 1822.    The -d- to -l- alteration in Latin
is the so-called Sabine -L-; compare Latin olere smell, from root of odor, and Ulixes, the Latin
form of Greek Odysseus. The Medieval Latin practice of writing -ch- for -c- before Latin -r- also
altered anchor, pulchritude, sepulchre. The -y- is pedantic, from belief in a Greek origin. Middle
English had lacrymable tearful (mid-15c.).


shift (v.)

Old English sciftan, scyftan arrange, place, order, also divide, partition; distribute, allot,
share, from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (cognates: Old Norse skipta to divide, change, separate, Old
Frisian skifta to decide, determine, test, Dutch schiften to divide, turn, German schichten to
classify, Schicht shift). This is said to be related to the source of Old English sceadan divide,
separate, (see shed (v.)).    c.1200 as to dispose; make ready; set in order, control, also
intransitive, take care of oneself. From c.1300 as to go, move, depart; move (someone or something),
transport. Sense of to alter, to change appeared mid-13c. (compare shiftless). Meaning change the
gear setting of an engine is from 1910; to shift gears in the figurative sense is from 1961.
Related: Shifted; shifting.


price (n.)

c.1200, pris value, worth; praise, later cost, recompense, prize (mid-13c.), from Old French pris
price, value, wages, reward, also honor, fame, praise, prize (Modern French prix), from Late Latin
precium, from Latin pretium reward, prize, value, worth, from PIE *pret-yo-,   from root *per- (5)
to traffic in, to sell (cognates: Sanskrit aprata without recompense, gratuitously; Greek porne
prostitute, originally bought, purchased, pernanai to sell; Lithuanian perku I buy).   Praise,
price, and prize began to diverge in Old French, with praise emerging in Middle English by early
14c. and prize being evident by late 1500s with the rise of the -z- spelling. Having shed the extra
Old French and Middle English senses, the word now again has the base sense of the Latin original.
To set (or put) a price on someone, offer a reward for capture is from 1766.


cry (v.)

early 13c., beg, implore, from Old French crier, from Vulgar Latin *critare, from Latin quiritare to
wail, shriek (source of Italian gridare, Old Spanish cridar, Spanish and Portuguese gritar), of
uncertain origin; perhaps a variant of quirritare to squeal like a pig, from *quis, echoic of
squealing, despite ancient folk etymology that traces it to call for the help of the Quirites, the
Roman constabulary. The meaning was extended 13c. to weep, which it largely replaced by 16c.
Related: Cried; crying.    Most languages, in common with English, use the general word for cry out,
shout, wail to also mean weep, shed tears to express pain or grief. Romance and Slavic, however, use
words for this whose ultimate meaning is beat (the breast), compare French pleurer, Spanish llorar,
both from Latin plorare cry aloud, but probably originally plodere beat, clap the hands. Also
Italian piangere (cognate with French plaindre lament, pity) from Latin plangere, originally beat,
but especially of the breast, as a sign of grief. U.S. colloquial for crying out loud is 1924,
probably another euphemism for for Christ's sake.


shebang (n.)

1862, hut, shed, shelter, popularized among soldiers in the U.S. Civil War, but like other Civil War
slang (such as skedaddle) of uncertain origin. Perhaps an alteration of shebeen (q.v.), but shebang
in the sense tavern, a seemingly necessary transitional sense, is not attested before 1878 and
shebeen seems to have been not much used in the U.S. Bartlett's 1877 edition describes it as A
strange word that had its origin during the late civil war. It is applied alike to a room, a shop,
or a hut, a tent, a cabin; an engine house. Phrase the whole shebang first recorded 1869, but
relation to the earlier use of the word is obscure. Either or both senses also might be mangled
pronunciations of French char-&agrave;-banc, a bus-like wagon with many seats. For an older guess:
[Shebang] used even yet by students of Yale College and elsewhere to designate their rooms, or a
theatrical or other performance in a public hall, has its origin probably in a corruption of the
French cabane, a hut, familiar to the troops that came from Louisiana, and constantly used in the
Confederate camp for the simple huts, which they built with such alacrity and skill for their winter
quarters. The constant intercourse between the outposts soon made the term familiar to the Federal
army also. [Americanisms: The English of the New World,  Maximillian Schele De Vere, New York,
Charles Scribner &amp; Co., 1872.]


Easter

Old English Easterd&aelig;g, from Eastre (Northumbrian Eostre), from Proto-Germanic *Austron, a
goddess of fertility and spring, probably originally of sunrise whose feast was celebrated at the
spring equinox, from *austra-, from PIE *aus- to shine (especially of the dawn).    Bede says Anglo-
Saxon Christians adopted her name and many of the celebratory practices for their Mass of Christ's
resurrection. Ultimately related to east. Almost all neighboring languages use a variant of Latin
Pascha to name this holiday (see paschal). Easter egg attested by 1825, earlier pace egg (1610s).
Easter bunny attested by 1904 in children's lessons; Easter rabbit is by 1888; the paganish customs
of Easter seem to have grown popular c. 1900; before that they were limited to German immigrants.
If the children have no garden, they make nests in the wood-shed, barn, or house. They gather
colored flowers for the rabbit to eat, that it may lay colored eggs. If there be a garden, the eggs
are hidden singly in the green grass, box-wood, or elsewhere. On Easter Sunday morning they whistle
for the rabbit, and the children imagine that they see him jump the fence. After church, on Easter
Sunday morning, they hunt the eggs, and in the afternoon the boys go out in the meadows and crack
eggs or play with them like marbles. Or sometimes children are invited to a neighbor's to hunt eggs.
[Phebe Earle Gibbons, Pennsylvania Dutch, Philadelphia 1882]


shit (v.)

Old English scitan, from Proto-Germanic *skit- (cognates: North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten,
German scheissen), from PIE *skei- to cut, split, divide, separate (see shed (v.)). The notion is of
separation from the body (compare Latin excrementum, from excernere to separate, Old English scearn
dung, muck, from scieran to cut, shear; see sharn). It is thus a cousin to science and conscience.
<b>Shit is not an acronym</b>. The notion that it is a recent word might be partly because it was
taboo from c.1600 and rarely appeared in print (neither Shakespeare nor the KJV has it), and even in
vulgar publications of the late 18c. it is disguised by dashes. It drew the wrath of censors as late
as 1922 (Ulysses and The Enormous Room), scandalized magazine subscribers in 1957 (a Hemingway story
in Atlantic Monthly) and was omitted from some dictionaries as recently as 1970 (Webster's New
World).    Extensive slang usage; meaning to lie, to tease is from 1934; that of to disrespect is
from 1903. Shite, now a jocular or slightly euphemistic and chiefly British variant of the noun,
formerly a dialectal variant, reflects the vowel in the Old English verb (compare German scheissen);
the modern verb has been influenced by the noun. Shat is a humorous past tense form, not
etymological, first recorded 18c. To shit bricks be very frightened attested by 1961. The connection
between fear and involuntary defecation has generated expressions since 14c., and probably also is
behind scared shitless (1936).


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


