sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


sheer (v.)

1620s, deviate from course (of a ship), of obscure origin, perhaps from Dutch scheren to move aside,
withdraw, depart, originally to separate (see shear (v.)). Related: Sheered; shearing. As a noun
from 1660s.


chiffon (n.)

feminine finery, sheer silk fabric, 1765, from French chiffon (17c.), diminutive of chiffe a rag,
piece of cloth (17c.), of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of English chip (n.1) or one of its
Germanic cousins. Klein suggests Arabic. Extension to pastry is attested by 1929.


bare (adj.)

Old English b&aelig;r naked, uncovered, unclothed, from Proto-Germanic *bazaz (cognates: German bar,
Old Norse berr, Dutch baar), from PIE *bhosos (cognates: Armenian bok naked; Old Church Slavonic
bosu, Lithuanian basas barefoot). Meaning sheer, absolute (c.1200) is from the notion of complete in
itself.


pure (adj.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname, and Old English had purlamb lamb without a blemish), unmixed, also
absolutely, entirely, from Old French pur pure, simple, absolute, unalloyed, figuratively simple,
sheer, mere (12c.), from Latin purus clean, clear; unmixed; unadorned; chaste, undefiled, from PIE
root *peue- to purify, cleanse (cognates: Latin putus clear, pure; Sanskrit pavate purifies,
cleanses, putah pure; Middle Irish ur fresh, new; Old High German fowen to sift).    Replaced Old
English hlutor. Meaning free from moral corruption is first recorded mid-14c. In reference to
bloodlines, attested from late 15c.


very (adj.)

late 13c., verray true, real, genuine, later actual, sheer (late 14c.), from Anglo-French verrai,
Old French verai true, truthful, sincere; right, just, legal, from Vulgar Latin *veracus, from Latin
verax (genitive veracis) truthful, from verus true (source also of Italian vero), from PIE root
*were-o- true, trustworthy (cognates: Old English w&aelig;r a compact, Old Dutch, Old High German
war, Dutch waar, German wahr true; Welsh gwyr, Old Irish fir true; Old Church Slavonic vera faith,
Russian viera faith, belief). Meaning greatly, extremely is first recorded mid-15c. Used as a pure
intensive since Middle English.


stark (adj.)

Old English stearc stiff, strong, rigid, obstinate; stern, severe, hard; harsh, rough, violent, from
Proto-Germanic *starkaz (cognates: Old Norse sterkr, Danish, Old Frisian sterk, Middle Dutch starc,
Old High German starah, German stark, Gothic *starks), from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). From the same root as stare (v.).    Meaning utter, sheer, complete first recorded c.1400,
perhaps from influence of common phrase stark dead (late 14c.), with stark mistaken as an intensive
adjective. Sense of bare, barren is from 1833. As an adverb from c.1200. Related: Starkly;
starkness. Stark-raving (adj.) is from 1640s; earlier stark-staring 1530s.


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


little (adj.)

Old English lytel not large, not much; short in distance or time; unimportant, also used in late Old
English as a noun, small piece; a short time, from Proto-Germanic *lutilla- (cognates: Old Saxon
luttil, Dutch luttel, Old High German luzzil, German l&uuml;tzel, Gothic leitils little), perhaps
originally a diminutive of the root of Old English lyt little, few, from PIE *leud- small. Often
synonymous with small, but capable of emotional implications which small is not [OED].    Phrase the
little woman wife attested from 1795. Little people the faeries is from 1726; as children, it is
attested from 1752; as ordinary people (opposed to the great), it is attested from 1827. Little Neck
clams (1884) are so called for Little Neck, Long Island, a neck of land on the island's North Shore.
Little by little is from late 15c. (litylle be litille). Little green men space aliens is from 1950.
Little black dress is from 1939.    At the beginning of summer, smart women who stay in town like to
wear sheer little black dresses. Because most little black dresses look alike, retailers struggle
each year to find something which will make them seem new. [Life, June 13, 1939]   Little Orphan
Annie originally was (as Little Orphant Annie) the character in James Whitcomb Riley's 1885 poem,
originally titled Elf Child. The U.S. newspaper comic strip created by Harold Gray (1894-1968)
debuted in 1924 in the New York Daily News.    LITTLE Orphant Annie's come to our house to stay,
An' wash the cups an' saucers up, an' brush the crumbs away,  An' shoo the chickens off the porch,
an' dust the hearth, an' sweep,  An' make the fire, an' bake the bread, an' earn her board-an'-keep;
An' all us other childern, when the supper-things is done,  We set around the kitchen fire an' has
the mostest fun  A-list'nin' to the witch-tales 'at Annie tells about,  An' the Gobble-uns 'at gits
you  Ef you  Don't  Watch  Out!  [Riley, Elf Child]


