shift (n.1)

c.1300, a movement, a beginning, from shift (v.). This is the word in to make shift make efforts
(mid-15c.). Sense of change, alteration is from 1560s. Sense of means to an end is from 1520s; hence
an expedient. Meaning mechanism for changing gear in a motor vehicle is recorded from 1914.
Typewriter shift key is from 1893; shift-lock is from 1899.    Meaning period of working time
(originally in a mine) is attested from 1809, with older sense relay of horses (1708); perhaps with
sense influenced by a North Sea Germanic cognate word (such as North Frisian skeft division,
stratum, skaft one of successive parties of workmen). Similar double senses of division and relay of
workers exist in Swedish skift, German schicht.


shift (n.2)

body garment, underclothing, 1590s, originally used alike of men's and women's pieces, probably from
shift (n.1), which was commonly used in reference to a change of clothes. In 17c., it began to be
used as a euphemism for smock, and was itself displaced, for similar reasons of delicacy, in 19c. by
chemise.


shiftless (adj.)

wanting in resources or energy and ability to shift for oneself, 1580s, from shift (n.1) in the
sense resources + -less. Related: Shiftlessly; shiftlessness.


shift (v.)

Old English sciftan, scyftan arrange, place, order, also divide, partition; distribute, allot,
share, from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (cognates: Old Norse skipta to divide, change, separate, Old
Frisian skifta to decide, determine, test, Dutch schiften to divide, turn, German schichten to
classify, Schicht shift). This is said to be related to the source of Old English sceadan divide,
separate, (see shed (v.)).    c.1200 as to dispose; make ready; set in order, control, also
intransitive, take care of oneself. From c.1300 as to go, move, depart; move (someone or something),
transport. Sense of to alter, to change appeared mid-13c. (compare shiftless). Meaning change the
gear setting of an engine is from 1910; to shift gears in the figurative sense is from 1961.
Related: Shifted; shifting.


shifter (n.)

1550s, one who shifts in any way; agent noun from shift (v.). As a mechanical contrivance, from
1869; specifically of the gear-changing mechanism in a motor-vehicle, from 1910.


shifty (adj.)

1560s, able to manage for oneself, fertile in expedients, from shift (n.1) in secondary sense of
dodge, trick, artifice + -y (2). Meaning habitually using dishonest methods, characterized by
trickery first recorded 1837. In a sense prone to shifting, of the wind, used from 1884. Related:
Shiftily; shiftiness.


swing-shift (n.)

1941 (typically 4 p.m. to midnight), from the notion of facing both ways between day and night
shifts; see swing (v.) + shift (n.).


makeshift

also make-shift, 1560s, as a noun, shifty person, rogue, from make (v.) + shift (v.). Adjectival
sense of substitute is first recorded 1680s. Compare make-sport a laughing stock (1610s).


noon (n.)

mid-12c., non midday, 12 o'clock p.m., midday meal, from Old English non 3 o'clock p.m., the ninth
hour, also the canonical hour of nones, from Latin nona hora ninth hour of daylight, by Roman
reckoning about 3 p.m., from nona, fem. singular of nonus ninth (see nones). Sense shift from 3 p.m.
to 12 p.m. began during 12c., when time of Church prayers shifted from ninth hour to sixth hour, or
perhaps because the customary time of the midday meal shifted, or both. The shift was complete by
14c. (same evolution in Dutch noen).


hisself (pron.)

see himself. The shift in felt meaning  of the first element of this compound from dative to
gentitive created this new word c.1400, whereas the same process did not change herself.


U

for historical evolution, see V. Used punningly for you by 1588 [Love's Labour's Lost, V.i.60], not
long after the pronunciation shift that made the vowel a homonym of the pronoun. As a simple
shorthand (without intentional word-play), it is recorded from 1862. Common in business
abbreviations since 1923 (such as U-Haul, attested from 1951).


Australia

from Latin Terra Australis (16c.), from australis southern + -ia. A hypothetical southern continent,
known as terra australis incognita, had been proposed since 2c. Dutch explorers called the newfound
continent New Holland; the current name was suggested 1814 by Matthew Flinders as an improvement
over Terra Australis as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the name of the
other great portions of the earth [Voyage to Terra Australis]. In 1817 Gov. Lachlan Macquarie,
having read Flinders' suggestion, began using it in official correspondence. The ultimate source is
Latin auster south wind, hence, the south country.    The Latin sense shift in australis, if it is
indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for east (see aurora), for which Latin uses
oriens (see orient), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian
peninsula, with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy
[Buck]; see Walde, Alois, Lateinisches etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch, 3rd. ed., vol. 1, p.87;
Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, Dictionnaire &eacute;tymologique de la langue latine, 2nd. ed.,
p.94. Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- to shine, source of aurora,
which also produces words for burning, with reference to the hot south wind that blows into Italy.
Thus auster (hot) south wind, metaphorically extended to south.


graveyard (n.)

1773, from grave (n.) + yard (n.1). Graveyard shift late-night work is c.1907, from earlier nautical
term, in reference to the loneliness of after-hours work.


dinner (n.)

c.1300, from Old French disner (11c.), originally breakfast, later lunch, noun use of infinitive
disner (see dine). Always used in English for the main meal of the day; shift from midday to evening
began with the fashionable classes. Childish reduplication din-din is attested from 1905.


bettor (n.)

also better (OED notes that English agent nouns in -er tend to shift toward -or as their senses
become more specific), agent noun from bet (v.).


split (adj.)

1640s, past participle adjective from split (v.). Split decision is from 1946 of court rulings, 1951
in boxing. Split shift is from 1904. Split personality first attested 1899.


Doppler

1871, in reference to Christian Doppler (1803-1853), Austrian scientist, who in 1842 explained the
effect of relative motion on waves (originally to explain color changes in binary stars); proved by
musicians performing on a moving train. Doppler shift is the change of frequency resulting from the
Doppler effect.


imperialist (n.)

c.1600, an adherent of an emperor, such as the emperor of Germany, France, China, etc., probably
modeled on French imp&eacute;rialiste (early 16c.); from imperial + -ist. The shift in meaning to
advocate of imperialism (1893) came via the British Empire, which involved a worldwide colonial
system. See imperialism. As a term of abuse in communist circles, attested by 1918. As an adjective
by 1816.


jibe (v.)

agree, fit, 1813, of unknown origin, perhaps a figurative extension of earlier jib, gybe (v.) shift
a sail or boom (see jib). OED, however, suggests a phonetic variant of chime, as if meaning to chime
in with, to be in harmony. Related: Jibed; jibes; jibing.


night (n.)

Old English niht (West Saxon neaht, Anglian n&aelig;ht, neht) night, darkness; the vowel indicating
that the modern word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte, dative niht), from Proto-Germanic
*nakht- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German naht, Old Frisian and Dutch nacht, German Nacht,
Old Norse natt, Gothic nahts).    The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- night (cognates: Greek
nuks a night, Latin nox, Old Irish nochd, Sanskrit naktam at night, Lithuanian naktis night, Old
Church Slavonic nosti, Russian noch', Welsh henoid tonight), according to Watkins, probably from a
verbal root *neg- to be dark, be night. For spelling with -gh- see fight.The fact that the Aryans
have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by
nights. [Weekley]Compare German Weihnachten Christmas. In early times, the day was held to begin at
sunset, so Old English monanniht Monday night was the night before Monday, or what we would call
Sunday night.    To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night shift is attested
from 1710 in the sense of garment worn by a woman at night (see shift (n.1)); meaning gang of
workers employed after dark is from 1839. Night soil excrement (1770) is so called because it was
removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train attested from 1838. Night life habitual
nocturnal carousing attested from 1852.


chop (v.2)

shift quickly, 1530s, earlier to bargain (early 15c.), ultimately from Old English ceapian to
bargain (see cheap); here with a sense of changing back and forth, probably from common expressions
such as to chop and change barter. To chop logic is recorded from 1570s. Related: Chopped; chopping.


darling

Old English deorling darling, favorite minion, double diminutive of deor dear (see dear (adj.)). The
vowel shift from -e- to -a- (16c.) is usual for -er- followed by a consonant. It is better to be An
olde mans derlyng, than a yong mans werlyng (1562).


dapper (adj.)

mid-15c., elegant, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German dapper bold, strong, sturdy, later quick,
nimble, from Proto-Germanic *dapraz, perhaps with ironical shift of meaning (cognates: Old High
German tapfar heavy, German tapfer brave), from PIE root *dheb- dense, firm, compressed.


scarify (v.)

mid-15c., make incisions in the bark of a tree, from Middle French scarifier score, scrape (leather
or hide), 14c., from Late Latin scarificare (see scarification). The sense cover with scars (1680s)
is a sense-shift from influence of scar (v.). Related: Scarified; scarifier; scarifying.


penguin (n.)

1570s, originally used of the great auk of Newfoundland (now extinct), shift in meaning to the
Antarctic bird (which looks something like it, found by Drake in Magellan's Straits in 1578) is from
1580s. Of unknown origin, though often asserted to be from Welsh pen head (see pen-) + gwyn white
(see Gwendolyn), but Barnhart says the proposed formation is not proper Welsh. The great auk had a
large white patch between its bill and eye. The French and Breton versions of the word ultimately
are from English.


smock (n.)

Old English smoc garment worn by women, corresponding to the shirt on men, from Proto-Germanic
*smukkaz (cognates: Old Norse smokkr a smock, but this is perhaps from Old English; Old High German
smoccho smock, a rare word; North Frisian smok woman's shift, but this, too, perhaps from English).
Klein's sources, Barnhart and the OED see this as connected to a group of Germanic sm- words having
to do with creeping or pressing close, such as Old Norse smjuga to creep (through an opening), to
put on (a garment), smuga narrow cleft to creep through; small hole; Old Swedish smog a round hole
for the head; Old English smugan, smeogan to creep, smygel a burrow. Compare also German schmiegen
to cling to, press close, nestle; and Schmuck jewelry, adornments, from schmucken to adorn,
literally to dress up.    Watkins, however, traces it to a possible Germanic base *(s)muk- wetness,
figuratively slipperiness, from PIE root*meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus). Either way, the original
notion, then, seems generally to have been garment one creeps or slips into, by the same pattern
that produced sleeve and slip (n.2).    Now replaced by euphemistic shift (n.2); smock was the
common word down to 18c., and was emblematic of womanhood generally, as in verb smock to render (a
man) effeminate or womanish (1610s); smocker man who consorts with women (18c.); smock-face person
having a pale, effeminate face (c.1600). A smock-race (1707) was an old country pastime, a foot-race
for women and girls with a smock as a prize. Modern meaning woman's or child's loose dress or blouse
is from 1907; sense of loose garment worn by artists over other clothes is from 1938.


switch (v.)

1610s, to strike with a switch, from switch (n.). Related: Switched; switching. The meaning turn
(off or on) with a switch device is first recorded 1853 of trains on tracks, 1881 of electricity,
1932 of radio or (later) television. Sense of shift, divert is from 1860. Meaning to change one
thing for another is recorded from 1919. Switch-hitter is 1945 in baseball slang; 1956 in the sense
of bisexual person.


swing (n.)

Old English swinge stroke, blow; chastisement, from swing (v.). Meaning suspended seat on ropes is
from 1680s. Meaning shift of public opinion is from 1899. The meaning variety of big dance-band
music with a swinging rhythm is first recorded 1933, though the sense has been traced back to 1888;
its heyday was from mid-30s to mid-40s. Phrase in full swing in total effect or operation (1560s)
perhaps is from bell-ringing. The backyard or playground swing-set is from 1951.


permutation (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French permutacion change, shift (14c.), from Latin permutationem (nominative
permutatio) a change, alteration, revolution, noun of action from past participle stem of permutare
change thoroughly, exchange, from per- thoroughly (see per) + mutare to change (see mutable).


behest (n.)

Old English beh&aelig;s a vow, perhaps from behatan to promise (from be- + hatan command, call; see
cite) and confused with obsolete hest command, which may account for the parasitic -t as well as the
Middle English shift in meaning to command, injunction (late 12c.).


bribe (n.)

late 14c., thing stolen, from Old French bribe bit, piece, hunk; morsel of bread given to beggars
(14c., compare Old French bribeor vagrant, beggar), from briber, brimber to beg, a general Romanic
word (Gamillscheg marks it as Rotwelsch, i.e. thieves' jargon), of uncertain origin; old sources
suggest Celtic (compare Breton breva to break). Shift of meaning to gift given to influence
corruptly is by mid-15c.


sullen (adj.)

1570s, alteration of Middle English soleyn unique, singular, from Anglo-French *solein, formed on
the pattern of Old French solain lonely, from soul single, from Latin solus by oneself, alone (see
sole (adj.)). The sense shift in Middle English from solitary to morose (i.e. remaining alone
through ill-humor) occurred late 14c. Related: Sullenly; sullenness.


spell (n.2)

1620s, a turn of work in place of another, from spell (v.2); compare Old English gespelia a
substitute. Meaning shifted toward continuous course of work (1706), probably via notion of shift
work (as at sea) where one man or crew regularly spelled another. Hence continuous stretch of
something (weather, etc.), recorded by 1728. Hence also, via the notion in give a spell (1750)
relieve another by taking a turn of work came the sense interval of rest or relaxation (1845), which
took the word to a sense opposite what it had at the start.


jib (n.)

foresail of a ship, 1660s, gibb, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to gibbet, from notion of a
sail hanging from a masthead [Barnhart, OED]. Or perhaps from jib (v.) shift a sail or boom (1690s),
from Dutch gijben, apparently related to gijk boom or spar of a sailing ship. Said to indicate a
ship's character to an observant sailor as a strange vessel approaches at sea; also nautical slang
for face, hence cut of (one's) jib personal appearance (1821).


refute (v.)

1510s, refuse, reject, from Middle French r&#233;futer (16c.) and directly from Latin refutare drive
back; rebut, disprove; repress, repel, resist, oppose, from re- back (see re-) + -futare to beat,
probably from PIE root *bhau- to strike down (see bat (n.1)).    Meaning prove wrong dates from
1540s. Since c.1964 linguists have frowned on the subtle shift in meaning towards to deny, as it is
used in connection with allegation. Related: Refuted; refuting.


transmutation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French transmutacion transformation, change, metamorphosis (12c.), from Late
Latin transmutationem (nominative transmutatio) a change, shift, noun of action from Latin
transmutare change from one condition to another, from trans- thoroughly (see trans-) + mutare to
change (see mutable). A word from alchemy.


govern (v.)

late 13c., from Old French governer (11c., Modern French gouverner) govern, from Latin gubernare to
direct, rule, guide, govern (source also of Spanish gobernar, Italian governare), originally to
steer, a nautical borrowing from Greek kybernan to steer or pilot a ship, direct (the root of
cybernetics). The -k- to -g- sound shift is perhaps via the medium of Etruscan. Related: Governed;
governing.


were (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ron (past plural indicative of wesan) and w&aelig;re (second person singular
past indicative); see was. The forms illustrate Verner's Law (named for Danish linguist Karl Verner,
1875), which predicts the s to z sound shift, and rhotacism, which changed z to r. Wast (second
person singular) was formed 1500s on analogy of be/beest, displacing were. An intermediate form,
wert, was used in literature 17c.-18c., before were reclaimed the job.


burden (n.1)

a load, Old English byr&eth;en a load, weight, charge, duty; also a child; from Proto-Germanic
*burthinjo- that which is borne (cognates: Old Norse byr&eth;r, Old Saxon burthinnia, German
b&uuml;rde, Gothic baur&thorn;ei), from PIE root *bher- (1) to bear, to carry; give birth (see
infer).    The shift from -th- to -d- took place beginning 12c. (compare murder (n.)). Archaic
burthen is occasionally retained for the specific sense of capacity of a ship. Burden of proof is
recorded from 1590s.


template (n.)

1670s, templet horizontal piece under a girder or beam, probably from French templet weaver's
stretcher, diminutive of temple, which meant the same thing, from Latin templum plank, rafter, also
consecrated place (see temple (n.1)).    The meaning pattern or gauge for shaping a piece of work is
first recorded 1819 in this form, earlier temple (1680s); the form was altered mid-19c., probably
influenced by plate [Barnhart], but the pronunciation did not begin to shift until more recently
(templet is still the primary entry for the word in Century Dictionary).


tour (n.)

c.1300, a turn, a shift on duty, from Old French tor, tourn, tourn a turn, trick, round, circuit,
circumference, from torner, tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). Sense of a continued ramble or
excursion is from 1640s. Tour de France as a bicycle race is recorded in English from 1916 (Tour de
France Cycliste), distinguished from a motorcar race of the same name. The Grand Tour, a journey
through France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy formerly was the finishing touch in the education of
a gentleman.


bob (n.2)

short hair, 1680s, attested 1570s in sense of a horse's tail cut short, from earlier bobbe cluster
(as of leaves), mid-14c., a northern word, perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Irish baban tassel,
cluster, Gaelic babag). Used over the years in various senses connected by the notion of round,
hanging mass, such as weight at the end of a line (1650s). The hair sense was revived with a shift
in women's styles early 20c. (verb 1918, noun 1920). Related words include bobby pin, bobby sox,
bobsled, bobcat.


vixen (n.)

Old English *fyxen (implied in adjective fyxan), fem. of fox (see fox (n.) and cognate with Middle
High German v&uuml;hsinne, German f&uuml;chsin). Solitary English survival of the Germanic feminine
suffix -en, -in (also in Old English gyden goddess; mynecen nun, from munuc monk; wlyfen she-wolf,
etc.). The figurative sense ill-tempered woman is attested from 1570s. The spelling shift from -f-
to -v- began late 1500s (see V).


vowel (n.)

c.1300, from Old French voieul (Modern French voyelle), from Latin vocalis, in littera vocalis,
literally vocal letter, from vox (genitive vocis) voice (see voice (n.)). Vowel shift in reference
to the pronunciation change between Middle and Modern English is attested from 1909. The Hawaiian
word hooiaioia, meaning certified, has the most consecutive vowels of any word in current human
speech; the English record-holder is queueing.


ad-

word-forming element expressing direction toward or in addition to, from Latin ad to, toward in
space or time; with regard to, in relation to, as a prefix, sometimes merely emphatic, from PIE *ad-
to, near, at (cognate with Old English &aelig;t; see at). Simplified to a- before sc-, sp- and st-;
modified to ac- before many consonants and then re-spelled af-, ag-, al-, etc., in conformity with
the following consonant (as in affection, aggression). In Old French, reduced to a- in all cases (an
evolution already underway in Merovingian Latin), but written forms in French were refashioned after
Latin in 14c. and English did likewise 15c. in words it had picked up from Old French. In many cases
pronunciation followed the shift.


chemise (n.)

late Old English, cemes shirt, from Old French chemise shirt, undertunic, shift, or directly from
Late Latin camisia shirt, tunic (Jerome; also source of Italian camicia, Spanish camisa); originally
a soldier's word, probably via Gaulish, from Proto-Germanic *hamithjan (cognates: Old Frisian
hemethe, Old Saxon hemithi, Old English heme&eth;e, German hemd shirt), of uncertain origin (see
heaven). The French form took over after c.1200. Related: Chemisette.


metastasis (n.)

1570s, originally in rhetoric, from Late Latin metastasis transition, from Greek metastasis a
removing, removal; migration; a changing; change, revolution, from methistanai to remove, change,
from meta- over, across (see meta-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). A rhetorical term in Late Latin for a sudden transition in subjects, medical use
for shift of disease from one part of the body to another dates from 1660s in English. Related:
Metastatic.


arbor (n.)

c.1300, herber, herb garden, from Old French erbier field, meadow; kitchen garden, from Latin herba
grass, herb (see herb). Later a grassy plot (early 14c., a sense also in Old French), a shaded nook
(mid-14c.). Probably not from Latin arbor tree, though perhaps influenced by its spelling.    The
change from er- to ar- before consonants in Middle English also reflects a pronunciation shift:
compare farm from ferme, harbor from Old English herebeorg.


afford (v.)

Old English gefor&eth;ian to put forth, contribute; further, advance; carry out, accomplish, from
ge- completive prefix (see a- (1)) + for&eth;ian to further, from for&eth; forward, onward (see
forth).    Change of -th- to -d- took place late 16c. (and also transformed burthen and murther into
their modern forms). Prefix shift to af- took place 16c. under mistaken belief that it was a Latin
word in ad-. Notion of accomplish (late Old English) gradually became manage to buy or maintain;
have enough money (to do something) (1833). Older sense is preserved in afford (one) an opportunity.
Related: Afforded; affording.


exempt (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French exempt (13c.) and directly from Latin exemptus, past participle of
eximere remove, take out, take away; free, release, deliver, make an exception of, from ex- out (see
ex-) + emere buy, originally take, from PIE root *em- to take, distribute (cognates: Latin sumere to
take, obtain, buy, Old Church Slavonic imo to take, Lithuanian imui, Sanskrit yamati holds,
subdues). For sense shift from take to buy, compare Old English sellan to give, source of Modern
English sell to give in exchange for money; Hebrew laqah he bought, originally he took; and
colloquial English I'll take it for I'll buy it.


