shrew (n.)

small insectivorous mammal, Old English screawa shrew-mouse, unknown outside English, and the
absence of evidence for the word between the OE. period and the 16th c is remarkable [OED]. Perhaps
from Proto-Germanic *skraw-, from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool (see shred (n.)), in reference to
the shrew's pointed snout. Alternative Old English word for it was scirfemus, from sceorfan to gnaw.
The meaning peevish, malignant, clamorous, spiteful, vexatious, turbulent woman [Johnson] is late
14c., from earlier sense of spiteful person (male or female), mid-13c., traditionally said to derive
from some supposed malignant influence of the animal, which was once believed to have a venomous
bite and was held in superstitious dread (compare beshrew). Paired with sheep from 1560s as the
contrasting types of wives.


shrewish (adj.)

late 14c., wicked, malignant, from shrew + -ish. Of women, malignant and scolding, from 1560s.
Related: Shrewishly; shrewishness.


shrewd (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, evil, from shrewe wicked man (see shrew). Compare crabbed from crab (n.), dogged
from dog (n.), wicked from witch (n.). The sense of cunning is first recorded 1510s. Related:
Shrewdly; shrewdness. Strutt's Sports and Pastimes of the People of England (1801) has a shrewdness
of apes for a company or group of them. Shrewdie cunning person is from 1916.


beshrew (v.)

early 14c., deprave, pervert, corrupt, from be- + shrew (v.) to curse; see shrew. Meaning to invoke
evil upon is from late 14c.


abusive (adj.)

1530s (implied in abusively), originally improper, from Middle French abusif, from Latin abusivus,
from abus-, past participle stem of abuti (see abuse (v.)). Meaning full of abuse is from 1580s.
Abuseful was used 17c., and Shakespeare has abusious (Taming of the Shrew, 1594). Related:
Abusiveness.


ermine (n.)

late 12c., from Old French ermine (12c., Modern French hermine), both the animal and the fur,
apparently from a convergence of Latin (mus) Armenius Armenian (mouse), ermines being abundant in
Asia Minor; and an unrelated Germanic word for weasel (represented by Old High German harmo ermine,
stoat, weasel, adj. harmin; Old Saxon harmo, Old English hearma shrew, etc.) that happened to sound
like it.


