shrewd (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, evil, from shrewe wicked man (see shrew). Compare crabbed from crab (n.), dogged
from dog (n.), wicked from witch (n.). The sense of cunning is first recorded 1510s. Related:
Shrewdly; shrewdness. Strutt's Sports and Pastimes of the People of England (1801) has a shrewdness
of apes for a company or group of them. Shrewdie cunning person is from 1916.


robber (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French robbere, Old French robeor, agent noun from rober (see rob). Robber
baron  in the corrupt, greedy financier sense is attested from 1870s, from a comparison of Gilded
Age capitalists to medieval European warlords.    It is the attempt of the more shrewd to take
advantage of the less shrewd. It is the attempt of the strong to oppress the weak. It is the old
robber baron in his castle descending, after men have planted their crops, and stealing them. [Henry
Ward Beecher, sermon, Truthfulness, 1871] <hr />   Regulation by combination means that the railroad
managers are feudal lords and that you are their serfs. It means that every car load of grain or
other produce of your fields and shops that passes over the New York Central shall pay heavy toll
for right of transit to Vanderbilt, the robber baron of our modern feudalism, who dominates that
way. [W.C. Flagg, testimony to Congress, 1874]


astute (adj.)

1610s, from Latin astutus crafty, wary, shrewd; sagacious, expert, from astus cunning, cleverness,
adroitness, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Greek asty town, a word borrowed into Latin and with
an overtone of city sophistication (compare asteism). Related: Astutely; astuteness.


sage (adj.)

wise, c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sage wise, knowledgeable, learned; shrewd,
skillful (11c.), from Gallo-Roman *sabius, from Vulgar Latin *sapius, from Latin sapere have a
taste, have good taste, be wise, from PIE root *sap- to taste (see sap (n.1)). Meaning characterized
by wisdom is from 1530s. Related: Sageness.


trope (n.)

1530s, from Latin tropus a figure of speech, from Greek tropos a turn, direction, course, way;
manner, fashion, in rhetoric, turn or figure of speech, related to trope a turning and trepein to
turn, from PIE root trep- (2) to turn (cognates: Sanskrit trapate is ashamed, confused, properly
turns away in shame; Latin trepit he turns). Technically, in rhetoric, a figure of speech which
consists in the use of a word or phrase in a sense other than that which is proper to it [OED], as
when we call a stupid fellow an ass, or a shrewd man a fox [Century Dictionary].


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


Philadelphia

city in Pennsylvania, U.S., from Greek, taken by William Penn to mean brotherly love, from philos
loving (see -phile) + adelphos brother (see Adelphia). Also the name recalls that of the ancient
city in Lydia, mentioned in the New Testament, which was so called in honor of Attalos II
Philadelphos, 2c B.C.E. king of Pergamon, who founded it. His title is said to have meant loving the
brethren. Philadelphia lawyer clever, shrewd attorney attested from 1788 in London, said originally
to have been applied to Andrew Hamilton, who obtained the famous acquittal of J.P. Zenger on libel
charges in 1735.    [C]ricket and coaching were after all popular in their day in places besides
Philadelphia. It was merely that Philadelphia kept on with them longer than most places. This is a
perennial Philadelphia trick, and gives to Philadelphia a sort of perpetual feeling of loss.
Philadelphians are always just now getting rid of things that are picturesque, like those gas lamps
on the streets, only because everybody else got rid of them long ago. [Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial
Philadelphians, 1963]


sharp (adj.)

Old English scearp having a cutting edge; pointed; intellectually acute, active, shrewd; keen (of
senses); severe; biting, bitter (of tastes), from Proto-Germanic *skarpaz, literally cutting
(cognates: Old Saxon scarp, Old Norse skarpr, Old Frisian skerp, Dutch scherp, German scharf sharp),
from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Lettish skarbs sharp, Middle Irish cerb cutting; see shear
(v.)).    The figurative meaning acute or penetrating in intellect or perception was in Old English;
hence keenly alive to one's own interests, quick to take advantage (1690s). Of words or talk,
cutting, sarcastic, from early 13c. Meaning distinct in contour is from 1670s. The adverbial meaning
abruptly is from 1836; that of promptly is first attested 1840. The musical meaning half step above
(a given tone) is from 1570s. Meaning stylish is from 1944, hepster slang, from earlier general
slang sense of excellent (1940). Phrase sharp as a tack first recorded 1912 (sharp as a needle has
been around since Old English). Sharp-shinned attested from 1704 of persons, 1813 of hawks.


