shrivel (v.)

1560s (implied in shriveled), of unknown origin, not found in Middle English; perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Swedish skryvla to wrinkle, to shrivel), perhaps ultimately connected
with shrimp (n.) and shrink (v.). Related: Shriveled; shriveling.


scrimp (v.)

to make too small, 1774, originally in English an adjective, scant, meager (1718), possibly from a
Scandinavian source (compare Swedish skrumpna to shrink, shrivel up, Danish skrumpen shrunken,
shriveled), or from a continental Germanic source akin to Middle High German schrimpfen, German
schrumpfen to shrivel, from Proto-Germanic *skrimp-, from PIE root *(s)kerb- to turn, bend. Related:
Scrimped; scrimping.


crine (v.)

c.1500, to shrink, shrivel, from Scottish English, from Gaelic crion to whither.


scrawny (adj.)

1824, apparently a dialectal variant of scranny lean, thin (1820), which is of uncertain origin but
probably from a Scandinavian source, perhaps Old Norse skr&aelig;lna to shrivel. Compare scrannel.


slink (v.)

Old English slincan to creep, crawl (of reptiles), from Proto-Germanic *slinkan (cognates: Swedish
slinka to glide, Dutch slinken to shrink, shrivel; related to sling (v.)). Of persons, attested from
late 14c. Related: Slinked; slinking.


wither (v.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English wydderen dry up, shrivel (late 14c.), intransitive, apparently a
differentiated and special use of wederen to expose to weather (see weather (v.)). Compare German
verwittern to become weather-beaten, from Witter weather. Transitive sense from 1550s. Related:
Withered; withering; witheringly.


wizen (v.)

Old English wisnian, weosnian to wither, dry up, waste away, from Proto-Germanic *wisnon (cognates:
Old Norse visna to wither, Old High German wesanen to dry up, shrivel, wither; German verwesen to
decay, rot), from PIE root *wei- (2) to wither. Related: Wizened.


cling (v.)

Old English clingan hold fast, adhere closely; congeal, shrivel (strong verb, past tense clang, past
participle clungen), from Proto-Germanic *klingg- (cognates: Danish klynge to cluster; Old High
German klinga narrow gorge; Old Norse klengjask press onward; Danish klinke, Dutch klinken to
clench; German Klinke latch).    The main sense shifted in Middle English to adhere to (something
else), stick together. Of persons in embrace, c.1600. Figuratively (to hopes, outmoded ideas, etc.),
from 1580s. Of clothes from 1792. Related: Clung; clinging.


shrink (v.)

Old English scrincan to draw in the limbs, contract, shrivel up; wither, pine away (class III strong
verb; past tense scranc, past participle scruncen), from Proto-Germanic *skrink- (cognates: Middle
Dutch schrinken), probably from PIE root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.1)).    Originally
with causal shrench (compare drink/drench). Sense of become reduced in size recorded from late 13c.
The meaning draw back, recoil (early 14c.) perhaps was suggested by the behavior of snails.
Transitive sense, cause to shrink is from late 14c. Shrink-wrap is attested from 1961 (shrinking-
wrap from 1959). Shrinking violet shy person attested from 1882.


