shudder (n.)

c.1600, from shudder (v.).


shudder (v.)

early 14c., possibly from Middle Dutch schuderen to shudder, or Middle Low German schoderen, both
frequentative forms from Proto-Germanic *skuth- to shake. Related: Shuddered; shuddering.


grisly (adj.)

Old English grislic horrible, dreadful, from root of grisan to shudder, fear, with cognates in Old
Frisian grislik horrible, Middle Dutch grisen to shudder, Dutch griezelen, German grausen to
shudder, fear, Old High German grisenlik horrible; of unknown origin; Watkins connects it with the
PIE root *ghrei- to rub, on notion of to grate on the mind. See also gruesome, to which it probably
is connected in some way.


abhor (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin abhorrere shrink back from, have an aversion for, shudder at, from ab- away
(see ab-) + horrere tremble at, shudder, literally to bristle, be shaggy, from PIE *ghers- start
out, stand out, rise to a point, bristle (see horror). Related: Abhorred; abhorring.


gruesome (adj.)

1560s, with -some (1) + Middle English gruen feel horror, shudder (c.1300); not recorded in Old
English or Norse, possibly from Middle Dutch gruwen or Middle Low German gruwen shudder with fear
(compare German grausam cruel), or from a Scandinavian source (such as Danish grusom cruel, grue to
dread, though others hold that these are Low German loan-words). One of the many Scottish words
popularized in England by Scott's novels.


horror (n.)

early 14c., from Old French horror (12c., Modern French horreur) and directly from Latin horror
dread, veneration, religious awe, a figurative use, literally a shaking, trembling, shudder, chill,
from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder, from PIE root *ghers- to bristle (cognates: Sanskrit
harsate bristles, Avestan zarshayamna- ruffling one's feathers, Latin eris (genitive) hedgehog,
Welsh garw rough). As a genre in film, 1934. Chamber of horrors originally (1849) was a gallery of
notorious criminals in Madame Tussaud's wax exhibition.


horrendous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin horrendus dreadful, fearful, terrible, literally to be shuddered at, gerundive of
horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror). Earlier form in English was horrend (mid-15c.).


horrible (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French horrible, orrible (12c.) horrible, repugnant, terrifying, from Latin
horribilis terrible, fearful, dreadful, from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror).
Used as a mere intensifier from mid-15c.


concentration camp (n.)

1901, compound for noncombatants in a war zone (see concentration); a term for a controversial idea
in the second Boer War (1899-1902), and the term emerged with a bad odor.    The concentration camp
now definitely taken its place side by side with Black Hole of Calcutta as one of those of horror at
which humanity will never cease shudder. [The Review of Reviews, London, March 1902]    It also was
used 1902 in reference to then-current U.S. policies in the Philippines, and retroactively in
reference to Spanish policies in Cuba during the insurrection there of 1896-98. The phrase was used
in U.S. during the Spanish-American war, but in reference to designated rendezvous points for U.S.
troops headed overseas. In reference to prisons for dissidents and minorities in Nazi Germany from
1934, in Soviet Russia from 1935.


horrid (adj.)

early 15c., hairy, shaggy, bristling, from Latin horridus bristly, prickly, rough, horrid,
frightful, from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror). Meaning horrible, causing horror
is from c.1600. Sense weakened 17c. to unpleasant, offensive.    [W]hile both [horrible and horrid]
are much used in the trivial sense of disagreeable, horrible is still quite common in the graver
sense inspiring horror, which horrid tends to lose .... [Fowler]    Related: Horridly.


