shun (v.)

Old English scunian to shun, avoid; abhor; desist, abstain; to hide, seek safety by concealment, of
uncertain origin; not found in any other language. Perhaps ultimately from PIE root *skeu- to cover,
to hide. Related: Shunned; shunning. A shun-pike (American English, 1911) was a road constructed to
avoid tolls.


shunt (v.)

early 13c., to shy, start, perhaps from shunen to shun (see shun), and altered by influence of shot
or shut. Meaning to turn aside is from late 14c.; that of move out of the way is from 1706. Adopted
by railways from 1842. Related: Shunted; shunting.


eschew (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French eschiver shun, eschew, avoid, dispense with, from Frankish *skiuhan dread,
avoid, shun, from Proto-Germanic *skeukhwaz (cognates: Old High German sciuhen to avoid, escape,
German scheuen to fear, shun, shrink from, scheu shy, timid); see shy (v.). Related: Eschewed;
eschewing. Italian schivare to avoid, shun, protect from, schivo shy, bashful also are loan words
from West Germanic.


inevitable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin inevitabilis unavoidable, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + evitabilis
avoidable, from evitare to avoid, from ex- out (see ex-) + vitare shun, originally go out of the
way.


canine (n.)

pointed tooth, late 14c., from Latin caninus of the dog, genitive of canis dog (source of Italian
cane, French chien), from PIE root *kwon- dog (cognates: Greek kyon, Old English hund, Old High
German hunt, Old Irish cu, Welsh ci, Sanskrit svan-, Avestan spa, Russian sobaka (apparently from an
Iranian source, such as Median spaka), Armenian shun, Lithuanian &#353;uo). The noun meaning dog is
first recorded 1869.


scare (v.)

1590s, alteration of Middle English skerren (c.1200), from Old Norse skirra to frighten; to shrink
from, shun; to prevent, avert, related to skjarr timid, shy, afraid of, of unknown origin. In
Scottish also skair, skar, and in dialectal English skeer, skear, which seems to preserve the older
pronunciation. To scare up procure, obtain is first recorded 1846, American English, from notion of
rousing game from cover. Related: Scared; scaring.


shy (adj.)

late Old English sceoh timid, easily startled, from Proto-Germanic *skeukh(w)az afraid (cognates:
Middle Low German sch&uuml;we, Dutch schuw, German scheu shy; Old High German sciuhen, German
scheuchen to scare away). Uncertain cognates outside Germanic, unless in Old Church Slavonic shchuti
to hunt, incite. Italian schivare to avoid, Old French eschiver to shun are Germanic loan-words.
Meaning lacking, short of is from 1895, American English gambling slang. Related: Shyly; shyness.


abomination (n.)

early 14c., abominable thing or action; late 14c., feeling of disgust, hatred, loathing, from Old
French abominacion abomination, horror, repugnance, disgust (13c.), from Latin abominationem
(nominative abominatio) abomination, noun of action from past participle stem of abominari shun as
an ill omen, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + omin-, stem of omen (see omen). Meaning intensified
by folk etymology derivation from Latin ab homine away from man, thus beastly.    Doubtless, the
life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater Number require that it shall be hard.
If a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life? Are the houses and doors and
churches in Flatland to be altered in order to accommodate such monsters? [Edwin Abbot, Flatland: A
Romance of Many Dimensions, 1885]


