sibling (n.)

brother or sister, 1903, modern revival (in anthropology) of Old English sibling relative, kinsman,
from sibb kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness, from Proto-Germanic *sibja-
blood relation, relative, properly one's own (cognates: Old Saxon sibba, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
sibbe, Old High German sippa, German Sippe, Gothic sibja kin, kindred), from PIE s(w)e-bh(o)-
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic sobistvo, Russian sob character, individuality), an enlargement of
the root *swe- self (see idiom). Related to the second element in gossip.  The word 'sib' or
'sibling' is coming into use in genetics in the English-speaking world, as an equivalent of the
convenient German term 'Geschwister' [E.&amp;C.; Paul, Human Heredity, 1930]    In Old English, sibb
and its compounds covered grounds of brotherly love, familial affection which tended later to lump
into love (n.), as in sibsumnes peace, concord, brotherly love, sibbian (v.) bring together,
reconcile, sibbecoss kiss of peace. Sibship, however, is a modern formation (1908). Sib persisted
through Middle English as a noun, adjective, and verb expressing kinship and relationship.


sib (n.)

short for sibling, attested from 1957.


totem (n.)

animal or natural object considered as the emblem of a family or clan, 1760, from Algonquian
(probably Ojibwa) -doodem, in odoodeman his sibling kin, his group or family, hence, his family
mark; also attested in French c.1600 in form aoutem among the Micmacs or other Indians of Nova
Scotia. Totem pole is 1808, in reference to west coast Canadian Indians.


gossip (n.)

Old English godsibb sponsor, godparent, from God + sibb relative (see sibling). Extended in Middle
English to any familiar acquaintance (mid-14c.), especially to woman friends invited to attend a
birth, later to anyone engaging in familiar or idle talk (1560s). Sense extended 1811 to trifling
talk, groundless rumor. Similar formations in Old Norse gu&eth;sifja, Old Saxon gu&thorn;ziff.


Sabine (adj.)

pertaining to a people in ancient Italy, late 14c., from Latin Sabinus (in poetic Latin often
Sabellus), perhaps literally of its own kind and connected to root of Sanskrit sabha gathering of
village community, Russian sebr neighbor, friend, Gothic sibja, Old High German sippa blood-
relationship, peace, alliance, Old English sibb relationship; peace; see sibling).


kiss (n.)

Old English coss; see kiss (v.). It became Middle English cuss, but this yielded to kiss, from the
verb. Kiss of death in figurative sense thing that signifies impending failure is from 1944
(Billboard, Oct. 21), ultimately in reference to Judas's kiss in Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi:48-50). The
kiss of peace was, in Old English, sibbecoss (for first element, see sibling).


