sidereal (adj.)

also siderial, 1630s, star-like; 1640s, of or pertaining to the stars, earlier sideral (1590s), from
French sidereal (16c.), from Latin sidereus starry, astral, of the constellations, from sidus
(genitive sideris) star, group of stars, constellation, probably from PIE root *sweid- to shine
(cognates: Lithuanian svidus shining, bright). Sidereal time is measured by the apparent diurnal
motion of the fixed stars. The sidereal day begins and ends with the passage of the vernal equinox
over the meridian and is about four minutes shorter than the solar day, measured by the passage of
the sun over the meridian.


consider (v.)

late 14c., from Old French considerer (13c.) reflect on, consider, study, from Latin considerare to
look at closely, observe, perhaps literally to observe the stars, from com- with (see com-) + sidus
(genitive sideris) constellation (see sidereal).    Perhaps a metaphor from navigation, but more
likely reflecting Roman obsession with divination by astrology. Tucker doubts the connection with
sidus, however, because it is quite inapplicable to desiderare, and suggests derivation instead from
the PIE root of English side meaning stretch, extend, and a sense for the full word of survey on all
sides or dwell long upon. Related: Considered; considering.


hour (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French hore one-twelfth of a day (sunrise to sunset), from Latin hora hour, time,
season, from Greek hora any limited time, from PIE *yor-a-, from root *yer- year, season (see year).
Greek hora was a season; 'the season;' in classical times, sometimes, a part of the day, such as
morning, evening, noon, night.    The Greek astronomers apparently borrowed the notion of dividing
the day into twelve parts (mentioned in Herodotus) from the Babylonians (night continued to be
divided into four watches), but as the amount of daylight changed throughout the year, the hours
were not fixed or of equal length. Equinoctal hours did not become established in Europe until the
4c., and as late as 16c. distinction sometimes was made between temporary (unequal) hours and
sidereal (equal) ones. The h- has persisted in this word despite not being pronounced since Roman
times. Replaced Old English tid, literally time (see tide (n.)) and stund period of time, point of
time, hour (compare German Stunde hour), As a measure of distance (the distance that can be covered
in an hour) it is recorded from 1785.


