sift (v.)

Old English siftan pass (something) through a sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib- (cognates: Dutch
ziften, Middle Low German sichten, German sichten to sift; see sieve (n.)). Intransitive sense to
pass loosely or fall scatteredly is from 1590s. Metaphoric sense of look carefully through first
recorded 1530s. Related: Sifted; sifting.


sifter (n.)

1570s, agent noun from sift (v.).


excrement (n.)

1530s, waste discharged from the body, from Latin excrementum, from stem of excretus, past
participle of excernere to sift out, discharge, from ex- out (see ex-) + cernere sift, separate (see
crisis). Originally any bodily secretion, especially from the bowels; exclusive sense of feces is
since mid-18c.


canvass (v.)

c.1500, from alternative spelling of canvas (n.) and probably meaning, originally, to toss or sift
in a canvas sheet, hence to shake out, examine carefully (1520s); to solicit votes (1550s). The
spelling with a double -s- dates from 16c. Compare Old French canabasser to examine carefully,
literally to sift through canvas. Related: Canvassed; canvassing. As a noun related to this,
attested from c.1600.


concern (v.)

early 15c., perceive, distinguish, also refer to, relate to, from Middle French concerner, from
Medieval Latin concernere concern, touch, belong to, figurative use of Late Latin concernere to
sift, mix, as in a sieve, from Latin com- with (see com-) + cernere to sift, hence perceive,
comprehend (see crisis). Apparently the sense of the prefix shifted to intensive in Medieval Latin.
Meaning worry is 17c. Related: Concerned; concerning. Letter opening to whom it may concern attested
by 1740.


garble (v.)

early 15c., to inspect and remove refuse from (spices), from Anglo-French garbeler to sift (late
14c.), from Medieval Latin and Italian garbellare, from Arabic gharbala to sift and select spices,
related to kirbal sieve, perhaps from Late Latin cribellum, diminutive of Latin cribrum sieve (see
crisis). Apparently a widespread word among Mediterranean traders (compare Italian garbellare,
Spanish garbillo); sense of mix up, confuse, distort language (by selecting some things and omitting
others) first recorded 1680s. Related: Garbled; garbling.


bunting (n.1)

flag material, 1742, perhaps from Middle English bonting gerundive of bonten to sift, because cloth
was used for sifting grain, via Old French, from Vulgar Latin *bonitare to make good.


recrement (n.)

dross, scum, 1590s, from French r&#233;cr&#233;ment (mid-16c.) or directly from Latin recrementum,
from re- (see re-) + cernere to sift, separate (see crisis).


cranny (n.)

mid-15c., possibly from a diminutive of Middle French cran notch, fissure (14c.), from crener to
notch, split, from Medieval Latin crenare, possibly from Latin cernere to separate, sift (see
crisis). But OED casts doubt on this derivation.


riddle (v.1)

perforate with many holes, 1817 (implied in riddled), earlier sift (early 13c.), from Middle English
ridelle coarse sieve, from late Old English hriddel sieve, altered by dissimilation from Old English
hridder sieve (see riddle (n.2)).


pour (v.)

c.1300, of unknown origin, not in Old English; perhaps from Old French (Flanders dialect) purer to
sift (grain), pour out (water), from Latin purare to purify, from purus pure (see pure). Replaced
Old English geotan. Intransitive sense from 1530s. Related: Poured; pouring; pourable. As a noun
from 1790.


scarification (n.)

c.1400, act of covering with scratches or slight cuts, from Old French scarification (14c.), from
Late Latin scarificationem (nominative scarificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
scarificare, from Latin scarifare scratch open, from Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline,
sketch, from skariphos pencil, stylus, from PIE root *skribh- to cut, separate, sift (see script
(n.)).


discern (v.)

late 14c., from Old French discerner (13c.) distinguish (between), separate (by sifting), and
directly from Latin discernere to separate, set apart, divide, distribute; distinguish, perceive,
from dis- off, away (see dis-) + cernere distinguish, separate, sift (see crisis). Related:
Discerned; discerning.


sieve (n.)

Old English sife sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib (cognates: Middle Dutch seve, Dutch zeef, Old High
German sib, German Sieb), from PIE *seib- to pour out, sieve, drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related
to sift. The Sieve of Eratosthenes (1803) is a contrivance for finding prime numbers. Sieve and
shears formerly were used in divinations.


certain (adj.)

c.1300, determined, fixed, from Old French certain reliable, sure, assured (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*certanus, from Latin certus sure, fixed, settled, determined (also source of Italian certo, Spanish
cierto), originally a variant past participle of cernere to distinguish, decide, literally to sift,
separate (see crisis).    Of persons, full of confidence in one's knowledge or judgment, from mid-
14c. Euphemistic use (of a certain age, etc.) attested from mid-18c. Certainer, certainest were
common to c.1750, but have fallen from proper use for some reason. Expression for certain assuredly
is attested by early 14c.


crime (n.)

mid-13c., sinfulness, from Old French crimne (12c., Modern French crime), from Latin crimen
(genitive criminis) charge, indictment, accusation; crime, fault, offense, perhaps from cernere to
decide, to sift (see crisis). But Klein (citing Brugmann) rejects this and suggests *cri-men, which
originally would have been cry of distress (Tucker also suggests a root in cry words and refers to
English plaint, plaintiff, etc.). Meaning offense punishable by law is from late 14c. The Latin word
is glossed in Old English by facen, also deceit, fraud, treachery. Crime wave first attested 1893,
American English.


pure (adj.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname, and Old English had purlamb lamb without a blemish), unmixed, also
absolutely, entirely, from Old French pur pure, simple, absolute, unalloyed, figuratively simple,
sheer, mere (12c.), from Latin purus clean, clear; unmixed; unadorned; chaste, undefiled, from PIE
root *peue- to purify, cleanse (cognates: Latin putus clear, pure; Sanskrit pavate purifies,
cleanses, putah pure; Middle Irish ur fresh, new; Old High German fowen to sift).    Replaced Old
English hlutor. Meaning free from moral corruption is first recorded mid-14c. In reference to
bloodlines, attested from late 15c.


hypocrisy (n.)

c.1200, ipocrisie, from Old French ypocrisie, from Late Latin hypocrisis, from Greek hypokrisis
acting on the stage, pretense, from hypokrinesthai play a part, pretend, also answer, from hypo-
under (see sub-) + middle voice of krinein to sift, decide (see crisis). The sense evolution in
Attic Greek is from separate gradually to answer to answer a fellow actor on stage to play a part.
The h- was restored in English 16c.    Hypocrisy is the art of affecting qualities for the purpose
of pretending to an undeserved virtue. Because individuals and institutions and societies most often
live down to the suspicions about them, hypocrisy and its accompanying equivocations underpin the
conduct of life. Imagine how frightful truth unvarnished would be. [Benjamin F. Martin, France in
1938, 2005]


crisis (n.)

early 15c., from Latinized form of Greek krisis turning point in a disease (used as such by
Hippocrates and Galen), literally judgment, result of a trial, selection, from krinein to separate,
decide, judge, from PIE root *krei- to sieve, discriminate, distinguish (cognates: Greek krinesthai
to explain; Old English hriddel sieve; Latin cribrum sieve, crimen judgment, crime, cernere (past
participle cretus) to sift, separate; Old Irish criathar, Old Welsh cruitr sieve; Middle Irish crich
border, boundary). Transferred non-medical sense is 1620s in English. A German term for mid-life
crisis is Torschlusspanik, literally shut-door-panic, fear of being on the wrong side of a closing
gate.


thresh (v.)

Old English &thorn;rescan, &thorn;erscan, to beat, sift grain by trampling or beating, from Proto-
Germanic *threskan to thresh, originally to tread, to stamp noisily (cognates: Middle Dutch
derschen, Dutch dorschen, Old High German dreskan, German dreschen, Old Norse &thorn;reskja, Swedish
tr&#246;ska, Gothic &thorn;riskan), from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)).    The
basic notion is of men or oxen treading out wheat; later, with the advent of the flail, the word
acquired its modern extended sense of to knock, beat, strike. The original Germanic sense is
suggested by the use of the word in Romanic languages that borrowed it, such as Italian trescare to
prance, Old French treschier to dance, Spanish triscar to stamp the feet.


script (n.)

late 14c., something written, earlier scrite (c.1300), from Old French escrit piece of writing,
written paper; credit note, IOU; deed, bond (Modern French &eacute;crit) from Latin scriptum a
writing, book; law; line, mark, noun use of neuter past participle of scribere to write, from PIE
*skribh- to cut, separate, sift (cognates: Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline, sketch,
Lettish skripat scratch, write, Old Norse hrifa scratch), from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)) on the notion of carving marks in stone, wood, etc.    Meaning handwriting is recorded from
1860. Theatrical use, short for manuscript, is attested from 1884. The importance of Rome to the
spread of civilization in Europe is attested by the fact that the word for write in Celtic and
Germanic (as well as Romanic) languages derives from scribere (French &eacute;crire, Irish
scriobhaim, Welsh ysgrifennu, German schreiben). The cognate Old English scrifan means to allot,
assign, decree (see shrive; also compare Old Norse skript penance) and Modern English uses write
(v.) to express this action.


