significant (adj.)

1570s, having a meaning, from Latin significantem (nominative significans, present participle of
significare make known, indicate (see signify). Earlier in the same sense was significative
(c.1400). Often having a special or secret meaning, hence important (1761). Related: Significantly.
Significant figure is from 1680s. Significant other (n.) attested by 1961, in psychology, the most
influential other person in the patient's world.


insignificant (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + significant. Related: Insignificantly.


operative (adj.)

producing the intended effect, early 15c., from Old French operatif (14c.) or directly from Late
Latin operativus creative, formative, from operat-, past participle stem of operari (see operation).
Weakened sense of significant, important is from 1955.


sematic (adj.)

significant, indicative, 1890, from Greek semat-, comb. form of sema  (genitive sematos) sign (see
semantic) + -ic. Used especially in biology, in reference to warning colors, etc.


chicken hawk (n.)

type of hawk that is believed to prey on domestic fowl, 1802, American English. Figuratively, from
the secondary senses of both words, public person who advocates war but who declined significant
opportunity to serve in uniform during wartime, at least 1988, American English. From chicken (n.) +
hawk (n.).


semiotic (adj.)

1620s, of symptoms, relating to signs of diseases, from Greek semeiotikos significant, also
observant of signs, adjective form of semeiosis indication, from semeioun to signal, to interpret a
sign, from semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema sign (see semantic). Its use in psychology dates
to 1923. Related: Semiotical (1580s).


important (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French important and directly from Medieval Latin importantem (nominative
importans), present participle of importare be significant in, from Latin importare bring in (see
import). Related: Importantly.


semantic (adj.)

1894, from French s&eacute;mantique, applied by Michel Br&eacute;al (1883) to the psychology of
language, from Greek semantikos significant, from semainein to show by sign, signify, point out,
indicate by a sign, from sema sign, mark, token; omen, portent; constellation; grave (Doric sama),
from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Sanskrit dhyati he meditates; see zen).


wuthering (adj.)

making a sullen roar (as the wind does), Northern England dialectal variant of Scottish and
dialectal whithering rushing, whizzing, blustering, from a verb whither (late 14c.) which was used
in reference to gusts of wind and coughing fits, from Old Norse *hvi&eth;ra (related to Norwegian
kvidra to go quickly to and fro, Old English hwi&thorn;a air, breeze).    Wuthering Heights is the
name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling. 'Wuthering' being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive
of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed, in stormy weather. [Emily Bront&#235;,
Wuthering Heights, 1847]    Charlotte also used forms of the word in her novels.


autocar (n.)

1895, from auto- + car.   <b>Which is it to be?</b> We observe that the London Times has lent the
weight of its authority to the word autocar, which it now prints without the significant inverted
commas but with a hyphen, auto-car. We believe that the vocable originated with a journal called the
Hardwareman, which succeeded in obtaining the powerful support of the Engineer for its offspring. As
for ourselves, being linguistic purists, we do not care for hybrid constructions--auto is Greek,
while car is Latin and Celtic. At the same time, such clumsy phrases as horseless carriages,
mechanical road carriages, and self-propelled vehicles are not meeting with general favour. Why not
therefore adopt the philogically sound motor-car, which could be run into a single word, motorcar?
[The Electrical Engineer, Dec. 20, 1895]


worth (adj.)

Old English weor&thorn; significant, valuable, of value; valued, appreciated, highly thought-of,
deserving, meriting; honorable, noble, of high rank; suitable for, proper, fit, capable, from Proto-
Germanic *werthaz toward, opposite, hence equivalent, worth (cognates: Old Frisian werth, Old Norse
ver&eth;r, Dutch waard, Old High German werd, German wert, Gothic wair&thorn;s worth, worthy),
perhaps a derivative of PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Probably related to weird. Old Church Slavonic vredu, Lithuanian vertas worth are Germanic loan-
words. From c.1200 as equivalent to, of the value of, valued at; having importance equal to; equal
in power to.


corn (n.1)

grain, Old English corn, from Proto-Germanic *kurnam small seed (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon
korn grain, Middle Dutch coren, German Korn, Old Norse korn, Gothic kaurn), from PIE root *gre-no-
grain (cognates: Old Church Slavonic zruno grain, Latin granum seed, Lithuanian &#382;irnis pea).
The sense of the Old English word was grain with the seed still in (as in barleycorn) rather than a
particular plant.    Locally understood to denote the leading crop of a district. Restricted to the
indigenous maize in America (c.1600, originally Indian corn, but the adjective was dropped), usually
wheat in England, oats in Scotland and Ireland, while Korn means rye in parts of Germany. Maize was
introduced to China by 1550, it thrived where rice did not grow well and was a significant factor in
the 18th century population boom there. Cornflakes first recorded 1907. Corned beef so called for
the corns or grains of salt with which it is preserved; from verb corn to salt (1560s).


