simile (n.)

late 14c., from Latin simile a like thing; a comparison, likeness, parallel, neuter of similis like
(see similar). Both things must be mentioned and the comparison directly stated. To Johnson, A
simile, to be perfect, must both illustrate and ennoble the subject.


facsimile (n.)

1660s, from Latin fac simile make similar, from fac imperative of facere to make (see factitious) +
simile, neuter of similis like, similar (see similar).


helpmate (n.)

companion, 1715, altered from helpmeet, a ghost word, from the Biblical translation of Latin
adjutorium simile sibi [Gen. ii:18] as an help meet (i.e. fit) for him (Hebrew 'ezer keneghdo),
which already by 1673 was being printed as help-meet and mistaken for one word.


high horse (n.)

originally (late 14c.) fine, tall horse; war horse, charger (high steed is from c.1300), also, like
high hall, status symbol; figurative sense of airs, easily wounded dignity in mount (one's) high
horse affect airs of superiority is from 1782 (Addison has to ride the great horse in the same
sense, 1716). Compare French monter sur ses grands chevaux; The simile is common to most languages
[Farmer].


pork (n.)

c.1300 (early 13c. in surname Porkuiller), flesh of a pig as food, from Old French porc pig, swine,
boar, and directly from Latin porcus pig, tame swine, from PIE *porko- young swine (cognates:
Umbrian purka; Old Church Slavonic prase young pig; Lithuanian parsas pig; and Old English fearh,
Middle Dutch varken, both from Proto-Germanic *farhaz).   Pork barrel in the literal sense is from
1801, American English; meaning state's financial resources (available for distribution) is attested
from 1907 (in full, national pork barrel); it was noted as an expression of U.S. President President
William Howard Taft:    Now there is a proposition that we issue $500,000,000 or $1,000,000,000 of
bonds for a waterway, and then that we just apportion part to the Mississippi and part to the
Atlantic, a part to the Missouri and a part to the Ohio. I am opposed to it. I am opposed to it
because it not only smells of the pork barrel, but it will be the pork barrel itself. Let every
project stand on its bottom. [The Outlook, Nov. 6, 1909, quoting Taft]    The magazine article that
includes the quote opens with:    We doubt whether any one knows how or when, or from what
application of what story, the phrase the National pork barrel has come into use. If not a very
elegant simile, it is at least an expressive one, and suggests a graphic picture of Congressmen
eager for local advantage going, one after another, to the National pork barrel to take away their
slices for home consumption.   Pork in this sense is attested from 1862 (compare figurative use of
bacon). Pork chop is attested from 1858. Pork pie is from 1732; pork-pie hat (1855) originally
described a woman's style popular c.1855-65, so called for its shape.


