simulated (adj.)

1620s, feigned, past participle adjective from simulate (v.). Meaning imitative for purposes of
experiment or training is from 1966 (agent noun simulator in the related sense dates from 1947; also
see simulation). In commercial jargon, artificial, imitation by 1942.


simulate (v.)

1620s, feign, pretend, assume falsely (implied in simulated), back-formation from simulation or else
from Latin simulatus, past participle of simulare to make like, imitate, copy. Meaning to use a
model to imitate certain conditions for purposes of study or training is from 1947. Related:
Simulating.


dissimulation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French dissimulation (12c.), from Latin dissimulationem (nominative
dissimulatio) a disguising, concealment, noun of action from past participle stem of dissimulare
make unlike, conceal, disguise, from dis- completely + simulare pretend, assume, simulate (see
simulation).


dissimulate (v.)

1530s, from Latin dissimulatus, past participle of dissimulare to disguise, hide, conceal, keep
secret, from dis- (see dis-) + simulare (see simulate). Related: Dissimulated; dissimulating.


butterfly (n.)

Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but of obscure signification. Perhaps
based on the old notion that the insects (or witches disguised as butterflies) consume butter or
milk that is left uncovered. Or, less creatively, simply because the pale yellow color of many
species' wings suggests the color of butter. Another theory connects it to the color of the insect's
excrement, based on Dutch cognate boterschijte. An overview of words for butterfly in various
languages can be found here. Also see papillon.    Applied to persons from c.1600, originally in
reference to vain and gaudy attire; by 1806 in reference to transformation from early lowly state;
in reference to flitting tendencies by 1873. The swimming stroke so called from 1936. Butterflies
light stomach spasms caused by anxiety is from 1908.    The butterfly effect is a deceptively simple
insight extracted from a complex modern field. As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's
department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer program to simulate
weather. One day he changed one of a dozen numbers representing atmospheric conditions, from .506127
to .506. That tiny alteration utterly transformed his long-term forecast, a point Lorenz amplified
in his 1972 paper, Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado
in Texas? [Peter Dizikes, The Meaning of the Butterfly, The Boston Globe, June 8, 2008]


