sine qua non

an indispensable condition, Latin, literally without which not, from sine without (see sans) + qua
ablative fem. singular of qui which (see who) + non not (see non-). Feminine to agree with implied
causa. The Latin phrase is common in Scholastic use. Sometimes a masculine form, sine quo non, is
used when a person is intended. Proper plural is sine quibus non.


sine die

indefinitely, Latin, literally without (fixed) day, from sine without (see sans) + ablative singular
of dies day (see diurnal).


sine prole

legalistic Latin, without issue, from sine without (see sans) + prole, ablative of proles offspring
(see prolific).


sine (n.)

trigonometric function, 1590s (in Thomas Fale's Horologiographia, the Art of Dialling), from Latin
sinus fold in a garment, bend, curve, bosom (see sinus). Used mid-12c. by Gherardo of Cremona in
Medieval Latin translation of Arabic geometrical text to render Arabic jiba chord of an arc, sine
(from Sanskrit jya bowstring), which he confused with jaib bundle, bosom, fold in a garment.


sinecure (n.)

1660s, church benefice with an emolument but without parish duties, from Medieval Latin beneficium
sine cura benefice without care (of souls), from Latin sine without (see sans) + cura, ablative
singular of cura care (see cure (n.1)).


sinew (n.)

Old English seonowe, oblique form of nominative sionu sinew, from Proto-Germanic *senawo (cognates:
Old Saxon sinewa, Old Norse sina, Old Frisian sine, Middle Dutch senuwe, Dutch zenuw, Old High
German senawa, German Sehne), from PIE root *sai- to tie, bind (cognates: Sanskrit snavah sinew,
Avestan snavar, Irish sin chain).


sinical (adj.)

of or relating to sines, 1590s, from sine + -ical.


rosin (n.)

late 13c., from Old French raisine, rousine, variants of r&eacute;sine (see resin). The verb is from
mid- 14c. Related: Rosined; rosining.


sinsemilla (n.)

potent strain of marijuana, 1975, from Mexican Spanish, literally without seed, from Latin sine
without (see sans) + semen seed (see semen).


cosine (n.)

1630s, from co. sinus, abbreviation of Medieval Latin complementi sinus (see complement + sine).


imbecility (n.)

early 15c., physical weakness, feebleness (of a body part), impotence, from Middle French
imb&eacute;cillit&eacute; and directly from Latin imbecillitatem (nominative imbecillitas) weakness,
feebleness, from imbecillus weak, feeble, traditionally said to mean unsupported (quasi sine
baculo), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + baculum a stick (see
bacillus). Weakness in mind (as opposed to body) was a secondary sense in Latin but was not attested
in English until 1620s.


sunder (v.)

Old English sundrian, syndrian to sunder, separate, divide, from sundor separately, apart, from
Proto-Germanic *sunder (cognates: Old Norse sundr, Old Frisian sunder, Old High German suntar aside,
apart; German sondern to separate), from PIE root *sene- apart, separated (cognates: Sanskrit
sanutar far away, Avestan hanare without, Greek ater without, Latin sine without, Old Church
Slavonic svene without, Old Irish sain different). Related: Sundered; sundering.


sans (adv.)

early 14c., from French sans, Old French sen, sens (with adverbial genitive) without, except, apart,
not counting, cognate with Proven&ccedil;al senes, Old Catalan senes, Old Spanish sen (Spanish sin),
Old Italian sen, from Vulgar Latin *sene, from Latin sine without, enlarged form of sed, se without,
from PIE root *sen(e)- apart, separated (see sunder). In reference to fonts, 1927, short for sans-
serif.


sincere (adj.)

1530s, pure, unmixed, from Middle French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus, of things, whole,
clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed, figuratively sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful, of
uncertain origin. Ground sense seems to be that which is not falsified. Meaning free from pretense
or falsehood in English is from 1530s.    There has been a temptation to see the first element as
Latin sine without. But there is no etymological justification for the common story that the word
means without wax (*sin cerae), which is dismissed out of hand by OED and others, and the stories
invented to justify that folk etymology are even less plausible. Watkins has it as originally of one
growth (i.e. not hybrid, unmixed), from PIE *sm-ke-ro-, from *sem- one (see same) + root of crescere
to grow (see crescent).


