sinister (adj.)

early 15c., prompted by malice or ill-will, intending to mislead, from Old French senestre, sinistre
contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left (14c.), from Latin sinister left, on the left side
(opposite of dexter), of uncertain origin. Perhaps meaning properly the slower or weaker hand
[Tucker], but Klein and Buck suggest it's a euphemism (see left (adj.)) connected with the root of
Sanskrit saniyan more useful, more advantageous. With contrastive or comparative suffix -ter, as in
dexter (see dexterity).    The Latin word was used in augury in the sense of unlucky, unfavorable
(omens, especially bird flights, seen on the left hand were regarded as portending misfortune), and
thus sinister acquired a sense of harmful, unfavorable, adverse. This was from Greek influence,
reflecting the early Greek practice of facing north when observing omens. In genuine Roman auspices,
the augurs faced south and left was favorable. Thus sinister also retained a secondary sense in
Latin of favorable, auspicious, fortunate, lucky.    Meaning evil is from late 15c. Used in heraldry
from 1560s to indicate left, to the left. Bend (not bar) sinister in heraldry indicates illegitimacy
and preserves the literal sense of on or from the left side (though in heraldry this is from the
view of the bearer of the shield, not the observer of it).


sinistrorse (adj.)

1856, a word wanted by the botanists to describe the direction of spiral structures in nature, from
Latin sinistrorsus toward the left side, from sinister left (see sinister). It was paired with
dextrorse but confusion over what was the proper point of view to reckon leftward or rightward
spiraling prevented the word being as useful as it might have been.


sinistral (adj.)

late 15c., unlucky, from Old French senestral, sinistral or Medieval Latin *sinistralis, from
sinister (see sinister). Meaning on the left side is from 1803. Related: Sinistrally.


dark (adj.)

Old English deorc dark, obscure, gloomy; sad, cheerless; sinister, wicked, from Proto-Germanic
*derkaz (cognates: Old High German tarchanjan to hide, conceal). Absence of light especially at
night is the original meaning. Application to colors is 16c. Theater slang for closed is from 1916.


cabal (n.)

1520s, mystical interpretation of the Old Testament, later society, small group meeting privately
(1660s), from French cabal, in both senses, from Medieval Latin cabbala (see cabbala). Popularized
in English 1673 as an acronym for five intriguing ministers of Charles II (Clifford, Arlington,
Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale), which gave the word its sinister connotations.


saltire (n.)

c.1400, an ordinary that resembles a St. Andrew's Cross on a shield or flag, consisting of a bend
dexter and a bend sinister crossing each other, from Middle French saultoir, literally stirrup, from
Medieval Latin saltatorium, properly neuter of Latin saltatorius pertaining to leaping, from salire
to leap (see salient (adj.)). The connection between a stirrup and the diagonal cross is perhaps the
two deltoid shapes that comprise the cross.


casuist (n.)

c.1600, one who studies and resolves cases of conscience, from French casuiste (17c.) or Spanish
casuista (the French word also might be from Spanish), Italian casista, all from Latin casus (see
case (n.1)) in its Medieval Latin sense case of conscience. Often since 17c. in a sinister or
contemptuous sense. Related: Casuistic; casuistical; casuistically; casuistry.  Casuistry ...
destroys, by distinctions and exceptions, all morality, and effaces the essential difference between
right and wrong. [Bolingbroke, 1736]


loose (adj.)

early 13c., not securely fixed; c.1300, unbound, from Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant,
dissolute, cognate with Old English leas devoid of, false, feigned, incorrect, from Proto-Germanic
*lausaz (cognates: Danish l&oslash;s loose, untied, Swedish l&#246;s loose, movable, detached,
Middle Dutch, German los loose, free, Gothic laus empty, vain), from PIE *leu- to loosen, divide,
cut apart (see lose). Meaning not clinging, slack is mid-15c. Meaning not bundled is late 15c. Sense
of unchaste, immoral is recorded from late 15c. Meaning at liberty, free from obligation is 1550s.
Sense of rambling, disconnected is from 1680s. Figurative sense of loose cannon was in use by 1896,
probably from celebrated image in a popular story by Hugo:    You can reason with a bull dog,
astonish a bull, fascinate a boa, frighten a tiger, soften a lion; no resource with such a monster
as a loose cannon. You cannot kill it, it is dead; and at the same time it lives. It lives with a
sinister life which comes from the infinite. It is moved by the ship, which is moved by the sea,
which is moved by the wind. This exterminator is a plaything. [Victor Hugo, Ninety Three]   Loose
end in reference to something unfinished, undecided, unguarded is from 1540s; to be at loose ends is
from 1807. Phrase on the loose free, unrestrained is from 1749 (upon the loose).


left (adj.)

c.1200, from Kentish and northern English form of Old English lyft- weak, foolish (compare lyft-adl
lameness, paralysis, East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof weak, worthless). It emerged 13c. as
opposite of right (the left being usually the weaker hand), a derived sense also found in cognate
Middle Dutch and Low German luchter, luft. But German link, Dutch linker left are from Old High
German slinc and Middle Dutch slink left, related to Old English slincan crawl, Swedish linka limp,
slinka dangle.    Replaced Old English winestra, literally friendlier, a euphemism used
superstitiously to avoid invoking the unlucky forces connected with the left side (see sinister).
The Kentish word itself may have been originally a taboo replacement, if instead it represents PIE
root *laiwo-, meaning considered conspicuous (represented in Greek laios, Latin laevus, and Russian
levyi). Greek also uses a euphemism for left, aristeros the better one (compare also Avestan
vairyastara- to the left, from vairya- desirable). But Lithuanian kairys left and Lettish kreilis
left hand derive from a root that yields words for twisted, crooked.    As an adverb from early 14c.
As a noun from c.1200. Political sense arose from members of a legislative body assigned to the left
side of a chamber, first attested in English 1837 (by Carlyle, in reference to the French
Revolution), probably a loan-translation of French la gauche (1791), said to have originated during
the seating of the French National Assembly in 1789 in which the nobility took the seats on the
President's right and left the Third Estate to sit on the left. Became general in U.S. and British
political speech c.1900.    Used since at least c.1600 in various senses of irregular, illicit;
earlier proverbial sense was opposite of what is expressed (mid-15c.). Phrase out in left field out
of touch with pertinent realities is attested from 1944, from the baseball fielding position that
tends to be far removed from the play. To have two left feet be clumsy is attested by 1902. The Left
Bank of Paris (left bank of the River Seine, as you face downstream) has been associated with
intellectual and artistic culture since at least 1893.


