sinuous (adj.)

full of turns and curves, 1570s, from Latin sinuosus full of curves, folds, or bendings, from sinus
curve, fold, bend (see sinus). Related: Sinuously; sinuousness.


worm (v.)

to move like a worm, c.1600, from worm (n.). In figurative senses attested from 1620s, suggesting
patient, sinuous progress. Meaning to free from worms is from 1620s. Related: Wormed; worming.


slinky (adj.)

sinuous and slender, of women or clothes, 1921, from slink + -y (2). Related: Slinkily; slinkiness.
As a proprietary name (with capital from S-) for a coil of spring marketed as a toy, 1948, by James
Industries Inc., Philadelphia, U.S.A.


serpent (n.)

c.1300, limbless reptile, also the tempter in Gen. iii:1-5, from Old French serpent, sarpent snake,
serpent (12c.), from Latin serpentem (nominative serpens) snake; creeping thing, also the name of a
constellation, from present participle of serpere to creep, from PIE *serp- to crawl, creep
(cognates: Sanskrit sarpati creeps, sarpah serpent; Greek herpein to creep, herpeton serpent;
Albanian garper serpent).    Used figuratively of things spiral or regularly sinuous, such as a type
of musical instrument (1730). Serpent's tongue as figurative of venomous or stinging speech is from
mistaken medieval notion that the serpent's tongue was its sting. Serpent's tongue also was a name
given to fossil shark's teeth (c.1600).


tango (n.)

syncopated ballroom dance, 1913 (the year it became a rage in Britain and America), from Argentine
Spanish tango, originally the name of an African-American drum dance, probably from a Niger-Congo
language (compare Ibibio tamgu to dance). Phrase it takes two to tango was a song title from 1952.
As a verb from 1913. Related: Tangoed.    It is hardly a year ago since the Tango reached this
country from South America by way of Paris. It was at first no more than a music-hall freak. But
some of those mysterious people who inspire new social fashions were attracted by its sinuous
movements and the strange backward kick, and this year it made its way into private houses as well
as public ball rooms. [The Living Age, Dec. 13, 1913]    <hr />   I need not describe the various
horrors of American and South American negroid origin. I would only ask hostesses to let one know
what houses to avoid by indicating in some way on their invitation cards whether the 'turkey-trot,'
the 'Boston' (the beginner of the evil), and the 'tango' will be permitted. [quoted in Current
Opinion, October 1913, as from a letter to the London Times]


