skeptical (adj.)

also sceptical, 1630s; see skeptic + -al (1). Related: Skeptically.


postmodernism (n.)

also post-modernism, by 1977, from post- + modernism. Defined by Terry Eagleton as the contemporary
movement of thought which rejects ... the possibility of objective knowledge and is therefore
skeptical of truth, unity, and progress [After Theory, 2003]. Related: post-modernist (1965).


moon (n.)

Old English mona, from Proto-Germanic *menon- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German mano, Old
Frisian mona, Old Norse mani, Danish maane, Dutch maan, German Mond, Gothic mena moon), from PIE
*me(n)ses- moon, month (cognates: Sanskrit masah moon, month; Avestan ma, Persian mah, Armenian mis
month; Greek mene moon, men month; Latin mensis month; Old Church Slavonic meseci, Lithuanian
menesis moon, month; Old Irish mi, Welsh mis, Breton miz month), probably from root *me- to measure,
in reference to the moon's phases as the measure of time.    A masculine noun in Old English. In
Greek, Italic, Celtic, Armenian the cognate words now mean only month. Greek selene (Lesbian
selanna) is from selas light, brightness (of heavenly bodies). Old Norse also had tungl moon,
(replacing mani in prose - Buck), evidently an older Germanic word for heavenly body, cognate with
Gothic tuggl, Old English tungol heavenly body, constellation, of unknown origin or connection.
Hence Old Norse tunglfylling lunation, tungl&#339;rr lunatic (adj.).    Extended 1665 to satellites
of other planets. To shoot the moon leave without paying rent is British slang from c.1823; card-
playing sense perhaps influenced by gambler's shoot the works (1922) go for broke in shooting dice.
The moon race and the U.S. space program of the 1960s inspired a number of coinages, including, from
those skeptical of the benefits to be gained, moondoggle (based on boondoggle). The man in the moon
is mentioned since early 14c.; he carries a bundle of thorn-twigs and is accompanied by a dog. Some
Japanese, however, see a rice-cake-making rabbit in the moon.


