skim-milk (n.)

milk from which the cream has been skimmed, 1590s, from skim (v.) + milk (n.).


skimmer (n.)

skimming utensil, late 14c., agent noun from skim (v.). From 1751 as one who reads superficially.
The North American shore bird (1785) is so called from its method of feeding. As one who diverts
money from earnings for some private purpose by 1970.


skim (v.)

early 15c. (skimmer, the utensil, is attested from late 14c.), to clear (a liquid) from matter
floating on the surface, lift the scum from, from Old French escumer remove scum, from escume
(Modern French &eacute;cume) scum, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German scum scum, German
Schaum; see scum). Meaning to throw (a stone) so as to skip across the surface of (water) is from
1610s. Meaning to move lightly and rapidly over the surface of is from 1650s, from the motion
involved in skimming liquid; that of to glance over carelessly (in reference to printed matter)
recorded by 1799. Related: Skimmed; skimming.


riffle (v.)

1754, to make choppy water, American English, perhaps a variant of ruffle make rough. The word
meaning shuffle (cards) is first recorded 1894, probably echoic; hence that of skim, leaf through
quickly (of papers, etc.) is from 1922. Related: Riffled; riffling.


hydroplane (v.)

by 1908, to skim the surface of water by use of hydroplanes, from hydroplane (n.). Meaning skid on a
thin layer of water (especially of automobile tires) first recorded 1962, properly aquaplane (itself
from 1961 in this sense). Related: Hydroplaned; hydroplaning.


chrism (n.)

oil mingled with balm, Old English chrisma, from Church Latin chrisma, from Greek khrisma an
unguent, anointing, unction, from khriein to anoint, from PIE root *ghrei- to rub (cognates:
Lithuanian griej&#249; to skim the cream off). Chrisom baptismal robe, is a c.1200 variant of this.
Related: Chrismal; chrismatory.


plane (v.2)

soar, glide on motionless wings, early 15c., from Old French planer to hover (as a bird), to lie
flat, from plan (n.) plane, from Latin planum flat surface (see plane (n.1)), on notion of bird
gliding with flattened wings. Of boats, etc., to skim over the surface of water, it is first found
1913. Related: Planed; planing.


shimmer (v.)

Old English scimerian to glitter, shimmer, glisten, shine, related to (perhaps a frequentative of)
scimian to shine, from Proto-Germanic *skim- (cognates: Swedish skimra, Dutch schemeren to glitter,
German schimmern), from PIE root *skai- to gleam, to shine (see shine (v.). Related: Shimmered;
shimmering.


meerschaum (n.)

type of soft white clay, 1784; from 1789 as tobacco pipe with a bowl made of meerschaum clay, from
German Meerschaum, literally sea-foam, so called from its frothy appearance; from Old High German
mari sea (see mere (n.)) + scum scum (see skim (v.)). A loan-translation of Latin spuma maris,
itself said to be a loan translation of Greek halos akhne, from Persian kaf-i-darya.


daisy (n.)

Old English d&aelig;gesege, from d&aelig;ges eage day's eye, because the petals open at dawn and
close at dusk. (See day (n.) + eye (n.)). In Medieval Latin it was solis oculus sun's eye. As a
female proper name said to have been originally a pet form of Margaret (q.v.).   Daisy-cutter first
attested 1791, originally of horses that trot with low steps; later of cricket (1889) and baseball
hits that skim along the ground. Daisy-chain in the group sex sense is attested from 1941. Pushing
up daisies dead is attested from 1918, but variants with the same meaning go back to 1842.


scan (v.)

late 14c., mark off verse in metric feet, from Late Latin scandere to scan verse, originally, in
classical Latin, to climb, rise, mount (the connecting notion is of the rising and falling rhythm of
poetry), from PIE *skand- to spring, leap, climb (cognates: Sanskrit skandati hastens, leaps, jumps;
Greek skandalon stumbling block; Middle Irish sescaind he sprang, jumped, sceinm a bound, jump).
Missing -d in English is probably from confusion with suffix -ed (see lawn (n.1)). Sense of look at
closely, examine minutely (as one does when counting metrical feet in poetry) first recorded 1540s.
The (opposite) sense of look over quickly, skim is first attested 1926. Related: Scanned; scanning.


