slacken (v.)

early 15c., from slack (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Slackened; slackening.


remiss (adj.)

early 15c., weak, dissolved, from Latin remissus relaxed, languid; negligent, past participle of
remittere slacken, abate, let go (see remit). Meaning characterized by lack of strictness is
attested from mid-15c.; that of characterized by negligence is from mid-15c.


remission (n.)

c.1200, forgiveness or pardon (of sins), from Old French remission forgiveness (of sins), relief
(12c.), from Latin remissionem (nominative remissio) relaxation, diminishing, lit. a sending back,
sending away, noun of action from past participle stem of remittere slacken, let go, abate (see
remit). Used of diseases since early 15c.


delay (v.)

c.1300, from Old French delaiier, from de- away, from (see de-) + laier leave, let, probably a
variant of Old French laissier, from Latin laxare slacken, undo (see lax). Related: Delayed;
delaying.


lassitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lassitude (14c.), from Latin lassitudinem (nominative lassitudo)
faintness, weariness, from lassus faint, tired, weary, from PIE *led- slow, weary (source also of
Old English l&aelig;t sluggish, slow; see late (adj.)), from root *le- to let go, slacken (see
lenient).


remit (v.)

late 14c., to forgive, pardon, from Latin remittere send back, slacken, let go back, abate, from re-
back (see re-) + mittere to send (see mission). Meaning allow to remain unpaid is from mid-15c.
Meaning send money (to someone) first recorded 1630s. Related: Remitted; remitting.


slake (v.)

late Old English sleacian, slacian become slack or remiss; slacken an effort (intransitive); delay,
retard (transitive), from sl&aelig;c lax (see slack (adj.)). Transitive sense of make slack is from
late 12c. Sense of allay, diminish in force, quench, extinguish (in reference to thirst, hunger,
desire, wrath, etc.) first recorded early 14c. via notion of make slack or inactive. Related:
Slaked; slaking.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


late (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;t occurring after the customary or expected time, originally slow, sluggish,
from Proto-Germanic *lata- (cognates: Old Norse latr sluggish, lazy, Middle Dutch, Old Saxon lat,
German la&szlig; idle, weary, Gothic lats weary, sluggish, lazy, latjan to hinder), from PIE *led-
slow, weary (cognates: Latin lassus faint, weary, languid, exhausted, Greek ledein to be weary),
from root *le- to let go, slacken (see let (v.)).    The sense of deceased (as in the late Mrs.
Smith) is from late 15c., from an adverbial sense of recently. Of women's menstrual periods,
attested colloquially from 1962. Related: Lateness. As an adverb, from Old English late.


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


liege (adj.)

word used by a vassal to address his superior or lord in the feudal system, c.1300, from Anglo-
French lige (late 13c.), Old French lige (feudal) liege, free, giving or receiving fidelity, perhaps
from Late Latin laeticus cultivated by serfs, from laetus serf, which probably is from Proto-
Germanic *lethiga- freed (cognates: Old English l&aelig;t half-freedman, serf; Old High German laz,
Old Frisian lethar freedman), from PIE root *le- let go, slacken (see let (v.)). Or the Middle
English word may be directly from Old High German leidig free. As a noun from late 14c., both as
vassal and lord. Hence, liege-man a vassal sworn to the service and support of a lord, who in turn
is obliged to protect him (mid-14c.).


lose (v.)

Old English losian be lost, perish, from los destruction, loss, from Proto-Germanic *lausa-
(cognates: Old Norse los the breaking up of an army; Old English forleosan to lose, destroy, Old
Frisian forliasa, Old Saxon farliosan, Middle Dutch verliesen, Old High German firliosan, German
verlieren), from PIE root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart, untie, separate (cognates: Sanskrit
lunati cuts, cuts off, lavitram sickle; Greek lyein to loosen, untie, slacken, lysus a loosening;
Latin luere to loose, release, atone for, expiate).    Replaced related leosan (a class II strong
verb whose past participle loren survives in forlorn and lovelorn), from Proto-Germanic *leusanan
(cognates: Old High German virliosan, German verlieren, Old Frisian urliasa, Gothic fraliusan to
lose).    Transitive sense of to part with accidentally is from c.1200. Meaning fail to maintain is
from mid-15c. Meaning to be defeated (in a game, etc.) is from 1530s. Meaning to cause (someone) to
lose his way is from 1640s. To lose (one's) mind become insane is attested from c.1500. To lose out
fail is 1858, American English. Related: Lost; losing.


