slack (adj.)

Old English sl&aelig;c remiss, lax, characterized by lack of energy, sluggish, indolent, languid;
slow, gentle, easy, from Proto-Germanic *slakas (cognates: Old Saxon slak, Old Norse slakr, Old High
German slah slack, Middle Dutch lac fault, lack), from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax).
Sense of not tight (in reference to things) is first recorded c.1300. As an adverb from late 14c.
Slack-key (1975) translates Hawaiian ki ho'alu. Slack water (n.) time when tide is not flowing is
from 1769. Slack-handed remiss is from 1670s. Slack-baked baked imperfectly, half-baked is from
1823; figuratively from 1840.


slack-jawed (adj.)

1882, over-talkative, from slack-jaw (n.) impertinent language (1797), from slack (adj.) + jaw (n.).
Meaning open-mouthed and speechless from astonishment, stupidity, etc., is from 1905.


slack (n.1)

early 14c., cessation (of pain, grief, etc.), from slack (adj.). Meaning a cessation of flow in a
current or tide is from 1756; that of still stretch of a river is from 1825. Meaning loose part or
end (of a rope, sail, etc.) is from 1794; hence figurative senses in take up the slack (1930
figuratively) and slang cut (someone) some slack (1968). Meaning quiet period, lull is from 1851.
Slacks loose trousers first recorded 1824, originally military.


slack (v.)

1510s, to moderate, make slack, back-formed from slack (adj.) after the original verb veered into
the specialized sense of slake. Meaning be remiss, inactive or idle, fail to exert oneself is
attested from 1540s; current use is probably a re-coining from c.1904 (see slacker, and compare Old
English slacful lazy, sleacmodnes laziness). Related: Slacked; slacking.


slackness (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;cnes slowness, remissness, laziness; see slack (adj.) + -ness.


slackly (adv.)

Old English sl&aelig;clice; see slack (adj.) + -ly (2).


slacker (n.)

popularized 1994, but the meaning person who shirks work dates to 1897; agent noun from slack (v.).
In early use also slackster (1901). Compare Old English sleacornes laziness, which is not, however,
an agent noun. Related: Slackerly; slackerish.


slacken (v.)

early 15c., from slack (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Slackened; slackening.


slack (n.2)

coal dust, mid-15c., sleck, of uncertain origin, probably related to Middle Dutch slacke, Middle Low
German slecke slag, small pieces left after coal is screened, perhaps related to slagge splinter
flying off metal when it is struck (see slag (n.)).


slake (v.)

late Old English sleacian, slacian become slack or remiss; slacken an effort (intransitive); delay,
retard (transitive), from sl&aelig;c lax (see slack (adj.)). Transitive sense of make slack is from
late 12c. Sense of allay, diminish in force, quench, extinguish (in reference to thirst, hunger,
desire, wrath, etc.) first recorded early 14c. via notion of make slack or inactive. Related:
Slaked; slaking.


lax (adj.)

c.1400, loose (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus wide, loose, open, figuratively loose,
free, wide, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (cognates: Greek legein to leave off,
stop, lagos hare, literally with drooping ears, lagnos lustful, lascivious, lagaros slack, hollow,
shrunken; Latin languere to be faint, weary, languidis faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid). Of
rules, discipline, etc., attested from mid-15c.


lazy (adj.)

1540s, laysy, of unknown origin. Replaced native slack, slothful, and idle as the main word
expressing the notion of averse to work. In 19c. thought to be from lay (v.) as tipsy from tip.
Skeat is responsible for the prevailing modern view that it probably comes from Low German, from a
source such as Middle Low German laisch weak, feeble, tired, modern Low German l&auml;&ouml;sig,
early modern Dutch leuzig, all of which may go back to the PIE root *(s)leg- slack. According to
Weekley, the -z- sound disqualifies a connection with French lass&eacute; tired or German lassig
lazy, weary, tired. A supposed dialectal meaning naught, bad, if it is the original sense, may tie
the word to Old Norse lasenn dilapidated, lasm&oslash;yrr decrepit, fragile, root of Icelandic las-
fur&eth;a ailing, las-leiki ailment. Lazy Susan is from 1917. Grose (Dictionary of the Vulgar
Tongue, 1788) has Lazy Man's Load: Lazy people frequently take up more than they can safely carry,
to save the trouble of coming a second time.


slouch (n.)

1510s, lazy man, variant of slouk (1560s), probably from a Scandinavian source, perhaps Old Norse
slokr lazy fellow, and related to slack (adj.) on the notion of sagging, drooping. Meaning stooping
of the head and shoulders first recorded 1725. Slouch hat, made of soft material, first attested
1764.


languid (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French languide (16c.) and directly from Latin languidus faint, listless, from
languere be weak or faint, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax). Related: Languidly;
languidness.


flux (n.)

late 14c., from Old French flus flowing, rolling, bleeding, or directly from Latin fluxus flowing,
loose, slack, past participle of fluere to flow (see fluent). Originally excessive flow (of blood or
excrement); an early name for dysentery; sense of continuous succession of changes is first recorded
1620s. The verb is early 15c., from the noun.


catalectic (adj.)

1580s, in a line of verse, wanting an unaccented syllable in the last foot, from Late Latin
catalecticus, from Greek katalektikos leaving off, from kata- down (see cata-) + legein to leave
off, cease from, from PIE *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (see lax). A complete line is said to be
acatalectic.


blasphemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French blasfemie blasphemy, from Late Latin blasphemia, from Greek blasphemia a
speaking ill, impious speech, slander, from blasphemein to speak evil of. Second element is pheme
utterance (see fame); first element uncertain, perhaps related to blaptikos hurtful, though blax
slack (in body and mind), stupid also has been suggested.


limp (v.)

1560s, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English lympen to fall short (c.1400), which is
probably from Old English lemphealt halting, lame, limping, which has a lone cognate in the rare
Middle High German limphin, and perhaps is from a PIE root meaning slack, loose, to hang down
(cognates: Sanskrit lambate hangs down, Middle High German lampen to hang down). Related: Limped;
limping. As a noun, 1818, from the verb.


sleep (v.)

Old English sl&aelig;pan to be or fall asleep; be dormant or inactive (class VII strong verb; past
tense slep, past participle sl&aelig;pen), from Proto-Germanic *slepan (cognates: Old Saxon slapan,
Old Frisian slepa, Middle Dutch slapen, Dutch slapen, Old High German slafen, German schlafen,
Gothic slepan to sleep), from PIE root *sleb- to be weak, sleep (cognates: Old Church Slavonic slabu
lax, weak, Lithuanian silpnas weak), which perhaps is connected to the root of slack (adj.). Sleep
with do the sex act with is in Old English:  Gif hwa f&aelig;mnan beswice unbeweddode, and hire mid
sl&aelig;pe ... [Laws of King Alfred, c.900]    Related: Slept; sleeping. Sleep around first
attested 1928.


loose (adj.)

early 13c., not securely fixed; c.1300, unbound, from Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant,
dissolute, cognate with Old English leas devoid of, false, feigned, incorrect, from Proto-Germanic
*lausaz (cognates: Danish l&oslash;s loose, untied, Swedish l&#246;s loose, movable, detached,
Middle Dutch, German los loose, free, Gothic laus empty, vain), from PIE *leu- to loosen, divide,
cut apart (see lose). Meaning not clinging, slack is mid-15c. Meaning not bundled is late 15c. Sense
of unchaste, immoral is recorded from late 15c. Meaning at liberty, free from obligation is 1550s.
Sense of rambling, disconnected is from 1680s. Figurative sense of loose cannon was in use by 1896,
probably from celebrated image in a popular story by Hugo:    You can reason with a bull dog,
astonish a bull, fascinate a boa, frighten a tiger, soften a lion; no resource with such a monster
as a loose cannon. You cannot kill it, it is dead; and at the same time it lives. It lives with a
sinister life which comes from the infinite. It is moved by the ship, which is moved by the sea,
which is moved by the wind. This exterminator is a plaything. [Victor Hugo, Ninety Three]   Loose
end in reference to something unfinished, undecided, unguarded is from 1540s; to be at loose ends is
from 1807. Phrase on the loose free, unrestrained is from 1749 (upon the loose).


