slander (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French esclaundrer, Old French esclandrer, from esclandre (see slander (n.)).
Related: Slandered; slandering; slanderer.


slanderous (adj.)

early 15c., from slander + -ous. Related: Slanderously; slanderousness.


slander (n.)

late 13c., state of impaired reputation, disgrace or dishonor; c.1300, a false tale; the fabrication
and dissemination of false tales, from Anglo-French esclaundre, Old French esclandre scandalous
statement, alteration (with interloping l [Century Dictionary]) of escandle, escandre scandal, from
Latin scandalum cause of offense, stumbling block, temptation (see scandal). From late 14c. as bad
situation, evil action; a person causing such a state of affairs.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


malediction (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French maledicion a curse (15c.), from Latin maledictionem (nominative
maledictio) the action of speaking evil of, slander, in Late Latin a curse, noun of action from past
participle stem of maledicere to speak badly or evil of, slander, from male badly (see mal-) +
dicere to say (see diction).


carp (v.)

complain, early 13c., originally to talk, from Old Norse karpa to brag, of unknown origin; meaning
turned toward find fault with (late 14c.), probably by influence of Latin carpere to slander,
revile, literally to pluck (see harvest (n.)). Related: Carped; carping.


blatant (adj.)

1596, in blatant beast, coined by Edmund Spenser in The Faerie Queen to describe a thousand-tongued
monster representing slander; probably suggested by Latin blatire to babble. It entered general use
1650s, as noisy in an offensive and vulgar way; the sense of obvious, glaringly conspicuous is from
1889. Related: Blatantly.


calumniate (v.)

1550s, from Latin calumniatus, past participle of calumniari to accuse falsely, from calumnia
slander, false accusation (see calumny). Related: Calumniated; calumniating.


sycophancy (n.)

1620s, from from sycophant + -cy, or else from Latin sycophantia, from Greek sykophantia false
accusation, slander; conduct of a sycophant, from sykophantes.


malign (v.)

to slander, mid-15c., from earlier more literal sense of to plot, to contrive (early 15c.), from Old
French malignier to plot, deceive, pervert, from Late Latin malignare to do maliciously, from
malignus (see malign (adj.)). Related: Maligned; maligning.


aspersion (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin aspersionem (nominative aspersio) a sprinkling, noun of action from past
participle stem of aspergere to sprinkle on, from ad- to (see ad-) + spargere sprinkle, strew (see
sparse). Originally in theology, the shedding of Christ's blood. Modern sense of a bespattering with
slander first attested 1590s. To cast aspersions was in Fielding (1749).


blasphemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French blasfemie blasphemy, from Late Latin blasphemia, from Greek blasphemia a
speaking ill, impious speech, slander, from blasphemein to speak evil of. Second element is pheme
utterance (see fame); first element uncertain, perhaps related to blaptikos hurtful, though blax
slack (in body and mind), stupid also has been suggested.


vilify (v.)

mid-15c., to lower in worth or value, from Late Latin vilificare to make cheap or base; to esteem of
little value, from Latin vilis cheap, base (see vile) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning to slander, speak evil of is first recorded 1590s. Related: Vilified, vilifying.


blaspheme (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French blasfemer to blaspheme (14c., Modern French blasph&eacute;mer), from
Church Latin blasphemare (also in Late Latin revile, reproach), from Greek blasphemein to speak
lightly or amiss of sacred things, to slander, from blasphemos evil-speaking (see blasphemy). A
reintroduction after the original word had been worn down and sense-shifted to blame (v.). Related:
Blasphemed; blaspheming.


lacerate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin laceratus, past participle of lacerare tear to pieces, mangle, figuratively,
to slander, censure, abuse, from lacer torn, mangled, from PIE root *lek- to rend, tear (cognates:
Greek lakis tatter, rag, lakizein to tear to pieces; Russian lochma rag, tatter, scrap; Albanian
l'akur naked). Related: Lacerated; lacerating.


Boeotian (adj.)

1590s, ignorant, dull, from Boeotia, district around Thebes in ancient Greece (said to have been so
called for its cattle pastures; Greek bous = ox), whose inhabitants were characterized as
proverbially dull and countrified by their neighbors, the Athenians. The Boeotians presumably held
reciprocal opinions, but their great writers, Plutarch and Pindar, though patriots, are full of
praise for Athenian deeds and institutions.    Though his aim was to vindicate Boeotia, [Pindar] has
probably done her a disservice, in that he has helped to immortalise the scurrilous proverb
&#914;&#959;&#953;&#969;&#964;&#943;&#945; &#973;&#962;, which he wished to confute. ... If left to
itself, the slander might have passed into oblivion long ago. [W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient
Boeotians, 1895]


challenge (n.)

early 14c., something one can be accused of, a fault, blemish; mid-14c., false accusation, malicious
charge; accusation of wrong-doing, also act of laying claim (to something), from Anglo-French
chalenge, Old French chalonge calumny, slander; demand, opposition, in legal use, accusation, claim,
dispute, from Anglo-French chalengier, Old French chalongier to accuse, to dispute (see challenge
(v.)). Accusatory connotations died out 17c. Meanings an objection in law, etc.; a calling to fight
are from mid-15c. Meaning difficult task is from 1954.


challenge (v.)

c.1200, to rebuke, from Old French chalongier complain, protest; haggle, quibble, from Vulgar Latin
calumniare to accuse falsely, from Latin calumniari to accuse falsely, misrepresent, slander, from
calumnia trickery (see calumny).    From late 13c. as to object to, take exception to; c.1300 as to
accuse, especially to accuse falsely, also to call to account; late 14c. as to call to fight. Also
used in Middle English with sense claim, take to oneself. Related: Challenged; challenging.


traduce (v.)

1530s, alter, change over, transport, from Latin traducere change over, convert, also lead in
parade, make a show of, dishonor, disgrace, originally lead along or across, bring through, transfer
(source also of French traduire, Spanish traducir, Italian tradurre), from trans- across (see
trans-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sense of defame, slander in English is from 1580s, from
Latin traducere in the sense of scorn or disgrace, a figurative use from the notion of to lead along
as a spectacle. Related: Traduced; traducing.


scandal (n.)

1580s, discredit caused by irreligious conduct, from Middle French scandale (12c.), from Late Latin
scandalum cause for offense, stumbling block, temptation, from Greek skandalon a trap or snare laid
for an enemy, in New Testament, metaphorically as a stumbling block, offense; originally trap with a
springing device, from PIE *skand- to leap, climb (see scan (v.); also see slander (n.), which is
another form of the same word).    Attested from early 13c., but the modern word likely is a
reborrowing. Meaning malicious gossip, also shameful action or event is from 1590s; sense of person
whose conduct is a disgrace is from 1630s. Scandal sheet sensational newspaper is from 1939.
Scandal-monger is from 1702.


live (v.)

Old English lifian (Anglian), libban (West Saxon) to be, to live, have life; to experience, also to
supply oneself with food, to pass life (in some condition), from Proto-Germanic *liben (cognates:
Old Norse lifa to live, remain, Old Frisian libba, German leben, Gothic liban to live), from PIE
root *leip- to remain, continue (source also of Greek liparein to persist, persevere; see leave).
Meaning to make a residence, dwell is from c.1200. Related: Lived; living.According to the Dutch
Prouerbe ... Leuen ende laetan leuen, To liue and to let others liue. [Malynes, 1622]To live it up
live gaily and extravagantly is from 1903. To live up to act in accordance with is 1690s, from
earlier live up live on a high (moral or mental) level (1680s). To live (something) down outwear
(some slander or embarrassment) is from 1842. To live with cohabit as husband and wife is attested
from 1749; sense of to put up with is attested from 1937. Expression live and learn is attested from
c.1620.


devil (n.)

Old English deofol evil spirit, a devil, the devil, false god, diabolical person, from Late Latin
diabolus (also the source of Italian diavolo, French diable, Spanish diablo; German Teufel is Old
High German tiufal, from Latin via Gothic diabaulus).    The Late Latin word is from Ecclesiastical
Greek diabolos, in Jewish and Christian use, Devil, Satan (scriptural loan-translation of Hebrew
satan), in general use accuser, slanderer, from diaballein to slander, attack, literally throw
across, from dia- across, through + ballein to throw (see ballistics). Jerome re-introduced Satan in
Latin bibles, and English translators have used both in different measures.    In Vulgate, as in
Greek, diabolus and d&aelig;mon (see demon) were distinct, but they have merged in English and other
Germanic languages.    Playful use for clever rogue is from c.1600. Meaning sand spout, dust storm
is from 1835. In U.S. place names, the word often represents a native word such as Algonquian
manito, more properly spirit, god. Phrase a devil way (c.1300) was originally Hell-ward, to Hell,
but by late 14c. as an expression of irritation.   Devil's books playing cards is from 1729, but the
cited quote says they've been called that time out of mind (the four of clubs is the devil's
bedposts); devil's coach-horse is from 1840, the large rove-beetle, which is defiant when disturbed.
Talk of the Devil, and he's presently at your elbow [1660s].


