slaughter (n.)

c.1300, killing of a cattle or sheep for food, killing of a person, from a Scandinavian *slahtr,
akin to Old Norse slatr a butchering, butcher meat, slatra to slaughter, slattr a mowing from Proto-
Germanic *slukhtis, related to Old Norse sla to strike (see slay (v.)) + formative suffix (as in
laugh/laughter). Meaning killing of a large number of persons in battle is attested from mid-14c.
Old English had slieht stroke, slaughter, murder, death; animals for slaughter; as in sliehtswyn pig
for killing.


slaughterhouse (n.)

also slaughter-house, late 14c., place where animals are butchered for market, from slaughter (n.) +
house (n.). The Slaughter-house cases in U.S. history were 1873.


slaughter (v.)

1530s, butcher an animal for market, from slaughter (n.). Meaning slay wantonly, ruthlessly, or in
great numbers is from 1580s. Related: Slaughtered; slaughtering.


massacre (v.)

1580s, from Middle French massacrer to slaughter (16c.), from massacre (n.) wholesale slaughter,
carnage (see massacre (n.)). Related: Massacred; massacring.


onslaught (n.)

1620s, anslaight, somehow from or on analogy of Dutch aanslag attack, from Middle Dutch aenslach,
from aen on (see on) + slach blow, related to slaen slay. Spelling influenced by obsolete (since
c.1400) English slaught (n.) slaughter, from Old English sleaht (see slaughter (n.)). No record of
its use in 18c.; apparently revived by Scott.


carnage (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French carnage (16c.), from Old Italian carnaggio slaughter, murder, from
Medieval Latin carnaticum flesh, from Latin carnaticum slaughter of animals, from carnem (nominative
caro) flesh, originally a piece of flesh, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). In
English always used more of slaughters of men than beasts. Southey (1795) tried to make a verb of
it.


Valhalla (n.)

heavenly hall in which Odin receives the souls of heroes slain in battle, 1696 (in Archdeacon
Nicolson's English Historical Library), from Old Norse Valh&ouml;ll hall of the battle-slain; first
element from valr those slain in battle, from Proto-Germanic *walaz (cognates: Old English w&aelig;l
slaughter, bodies of the slain, Old High German wal battlefield, slaughter), from PIE root *wele-
(2) to strike, wound (cognates: Avestan vareta- seized, prisoner, Latin veles ghosts of the dead,
Old Irish fuil blood, Welsh gwel wound). Second element is from h&ouml;ll hall, from PIE root *kel-
(2) to conceal (see cell). Reintroduced by 18c. antiquaries. Figurative sense is from 1845.


slug (n.3)

a hard blow, 1830, dialectal, of uncertain origin; perhaps related to slaughter or perhaps a
secondary form of slay.


battlefield (n.)

1812, from battle (n.) + field (n.). The usual word for it in Old English was w&aelig;lstow,
literally slaughter-place.


stockyard (n.)

also stock-yard, enclosure for sorting and keeping cattle, swine, sheep, etc., typically connected
with a railroad or slaughter-house, 1802, from stock (n.1) + yard (n.1).


massacre (n.)

1580s, from Middle French massacre wholesale slaughter, carnage, from Old French macacre, macecle
slaughterhouse, butchery, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Latin macellum provisions store,
butcher shop.


bloodshed (n.)

also blood-shed, c.1500, the shedding of (one's) blood, from verbal phrase (attested in late Old
English), from blood (n.) + shed (v.). The sense of slaughter is much older (early 13c., implied in
bloodshedding).


noxious (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin noxius hurtful, injurious, from noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing liability
(related to nocere to hurt, and to nex slaughter), from PIE *nek-ro-, causative form of root *nek-
(1) death (see necro-).


mortality (n.)

mid-14c., condition of being mortal, from Old French mortalite massacre, slaughter; fatal illness;
poverty; destruction (12c.), from Latin mortalitem (nominative mortalitas) state of being mortal;
subjection to death, from mortalis (see mortal (adj.)). Meaning widespread death is from c.1400;
meaning number of deaths from some cause or in a given period is from 1640s.


abate (v.)

put an end to (c.1300); to grow less, diminish in power or influence (early 14c.), from Old French
abattre beat down, cast down, from Vulgar Latin *abbatere, from Latin ad to (see ad-) + battuere to
beat (see batter (v.)). Secondary sense of to fell, slaughter is in abatis and abattoir. Related:
Abated; abating.


manslaughter (n.)

mid-14c.,  act, crime, or sin of killing another human being, in battle or not, from man (n.) +
slaughter (n.). Replaced Old English mannsl&aelig;ht (Anglian), mannslieht (West Saxon), from
sl&aelig;ht, slieht act of killing (see slay). Etymologically identical with homicide, but in legal
use usually distinguished from murder and restricted to simple homicide.


sanguinary (adj.)

characterized by slaughter, 1620s, possibly from French sanguinaire, or directly from Latin
sanguinarius pertaining to blood, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood, of unknown origin. Latin
distinguished sanguis, the generic word, from cruor blood from a wound. The latter word is related
to Greek kreas meat, Sanskrit kravis- raw flesh, Old English hreaw- raw (see raw).


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


sunny (adj.)

full of sun, early 14c., from sun (n.) + -y (2). Compare Dutch zonnig, German sonnig. Figurative
sense of cheerful is attested from 1540s. Sunny side in reference to optimistic outlook is from
1831. Eggs served sunny side up first attested 1887, in lunch counter slang, in reference to
appearance when served.    Young Man (in Park Row coffee-and-cake saloon)--Waiter, I want a
beefsteak, unpeeled potatoes, and a couple of eggs fried on one side only!    Waiter
(vociferously)--Slaughter in the pan, a Murphy with his coat on, an' two white wings with the sunny
side up! [Puck, April 27, 1887]     Related: Sunnily; sunniness. As a noun meaning sunfish from
1835.


sword (n.)

Old English sweord, swyrd (West Saxon), sword (Northumbrian) sword, from Proto-Germanic *swerdam
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian swerd, Old Norse sver&eth;, Swedish sv&auml;rd, Middle Dutch
swaert, Dutch zwaard, Old High German swert, German Schwert a sword), related to Old High German
sweran to hurt, from *swertha-, literally the cutting weapon, from PIE root *swer- (3) to cut,
pierce.    Contrast with plowshare is from the Old Testament (Isaiah ii:4, Micah iv:3). Phrase put
(originally do) to the sword kill, slaughter is recorded from mid-14c. An older Germanic word for it
is in Old Saxon heoru, Gothic hairus a sword.


hog (n.)

late 12c. (implied in hogaster), swine reared for slaughter (usually about a year old), also used by
stockmen for young sheep (mid-14c.) and for horse older than one year, suggesting the original sense
had something to do with an age, not a type of animal. Not evidenced in Old English, but it may have
existed. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as improbable.
Figurative sense of gluttonous person is first recorded early 15c. Meaning Harley-Davidson
motorcycle is attested from 1967.    To go hog wild is from 1904. Hog in armor awkward or clumsy
person in ill-fitting attire is from 1650s. Phrase to go the whole hog (1828) is sometimes said to
be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than
just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the story (recorded in English from 1779) of
Muslim sophists, forbidden by the Quran from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated
which part was intended and managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition. Road hog is
attested from 1886.


wade (v.)

Old English wadan to go forward, proceed, move, stride, advance (the modern sense perhaps
represented in oferwaden wade across), from Proto-Germanic *wadan (cognates: Old Norse va&eth;a,
Danish vade, Old Frisian wada, Dutch waden, Old High German watan, German waten to wade), from PIE
root *wadh- (2) to go, found only in Germanic and Latin (cognates: Latin vadere to go, vadum shoal,
ford, vadare to wade). Italian guado, French gu&eacute; ford are Germanic loan-words.
Specifically walk into or through water (or any substance which impedes the free motion of limbs)
c.1200. Originally a strong verb (past tense wod, past participle wad); weak since 16c. Figurative
sense of to go into (action, battle, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Related: Waded; wading.
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,  And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,    [Gray,
Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard]


slay (v.)

Old English slean to smite, strike, beat, also to kill with a weapon, slaughter (class VI strong
verb; past tense sloh, slog, past participle slagen), from Proto-Germanic *slahan, from root *slog-
to hit (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian sla, Danish slaa, Middle Dutch slaen, Dutch slaan, Old
High German slahan, German schlagen, Gothic slahan to strike). The Germanic words are from PIE root
*slak- to strike (cognates: Middle Irish past participle slactha struck, slacc sword).    Modern
German cognate schlagen maintains the original sense of to strike. Meaning overwhelm with delight
(mid-14c.) preserves one of the wide range of meanings the word once had, including, in Old English,
stamp (coins); forge (weapons); throw, cast; pitch (a tent), to sting (of a snake); to dash, rush,
come quickly; play (the harp); gain by conquest.


murder (n.)

c.1300, murdre, from Old English mor&eth;or (plural mor&thorn;ras) secret killing of a person,
unlawful killing, also mortal sin, crime; punishment, torment, misery, from Proto-Germanic *murthra-
(cognates: Goth maur&thorn;r, and, from a variant form of the same root, Old Saxon morth, Old
Frisian morth, Old Norse mor&eth;, Middle Dutch moort, Dutch moord, German Mord murder), from PIE
*mrtro-, from root *mer- to die (see mortal (adj.)). The spelling with -d- probably reflects
influence of Anglo-French murdre, from Old French mordre, from Medieval Latin murdrum, from the
Germanic root.    Viking custom, typical of Germanic, distinguished mor&eth; (Old Norse) secret
slaughter, from vig (Old Norse) slaying. The former involved concealment, or slaying a man by night
or when asleep, and was a heinous crime. The latter was not a disgrace, if the killer acknowledged
his deed, but he was subject to vengeance or demand for compensation.Mordre wol out that se we day
by day. [Chaucer, Nun's Priest's Tale, c.1386]Weakened sense of very unpleasant situation is from
1878.


raven (n.)

Old English hr&aelig;fn (Mercian), hrefn; hr&aelig;fn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-
Germanic *khrabanas (cognates: Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban,
German Rabe raven, Old English hroc rook), from PIE root *ker- (2), imitative of harsh sounds
(cognates: Latin crepare to creak, clatter, cornix crow, corvus raven; Greek korax raven, korone
crow; Old Church Slavonic kruku raven; Lithuanian krauklys crow). Raven mythology shows considerable
homogeneity throughout the whole area [northern regions of the northern hemisphere] in spite of
differences in detail. The Raven peeps forth from the mists of time and the thickets of mythology,
as a bird of slaughter, a storm bird, a sun and fire bird, a messenger, an oracular figure and a
craftsman or culture hero. [Edward A. Armstrong, The Folklore of Birds, 1958]Old English also used
hr&aelig;mn, hremm. The raven standard was the flag of the Danish Vikings. The Quran connects the
raven with Cain's murder of Abel; but in Christianity the bird plays a positive role in the stories
of St. Benedict, St. Paul the Hermit, St. Vincent, etc. It was anciently believed to live to great
old age, but the ancients also believed it wanting in parental care. The vikings, like Noah, were
said to have used the raven to discover land. When uncertain of their course they let one loose, and
steered the vessel in his track, deeming that the land lay in the direction of his flight; if he
returned to the ship, it was supposed to be at a distance [Charles Swainson, The Folk Lore and
Provincial Names of British Birds, London, 1886].


Saxon (n.)

c.1200, from Late Latin Saxonem (nominative Saxo; also source of French Saxon, Spanish Sajon,
Italian Sassone), usually found in plural Saxones, from a Germanic source (Old English Seaxe, Old
High German Sahsun, German Sachse Saxon), with a possible literal sense of swordsmen (compare Old
English seax, Old Frisian, Old Norse sax knife, short sword, dagger, Old High German Saxnot, name of
a war-god), from Proto-Germanic *sahsam knife, from PIE *sek- to cut (see section (n.)).    The word
figures in the well-known story, related by Geoffrey of Monmouth, who got it from Nennius, of the
treacherous slaughter by the Anglo-Saxons of their British hosts:Accordingly they all met at the
time and place appointed, and began to treat of peace; and when a fit opportunity offered for
executing his villany, Hengist cried out, Nemet oure Saxas, and the same instant seized Vortigern,
and held him by his cloak. The Saxons, upon the signal given, drew their daggers, and falling upon
the princes, who little suspected any such design, assassinated them to the number of four hundred
and sixty barons and consuls ....The OED editors helpfully point out that the correct Old English
(with an uninflected plural) would be nima&eth; eowre seax. For other Germanic national names that
may have derived from characteristic tribal weapons, see Frank, Lombard. As an adjective from 1560s.
Still in 20c. used by Celtic speakers to mean an Englishman (Welsh Sais, plural Seison an
Englishman; Seisoneg English).    In reference to the modern German state of Saxony (German Sachsen,
French Saxe) it is attested from 1630s. Saxon is the source of the -sex in Essex, Sussex, etc.
(compare Middlesex, from Old English Middel-Seaxe Middle Saxons). Bede distinguished the Anglo-
Saxons, who conquered much of southern Britain, from the Ealdesaxe Old Saxons, who stayed in
Germany.


