sledge (n.2)

sleigh, 1610s, from dialectal Dutch sleedse, variant of slede (see sled (n.)); said by OED to be
perhaps of Frisian origin.


sledgehammer (n.)

late 15c., from sledge (n.1) + hammer (n.). As a verb, from 1834. Old English had slegebytel hammer,
from beetle (n.2).


sledge (n.1)

heavy hammer, Old English slecg hammer, mallet, from Proto-Germanic *slagjo- (cognates: Old Norse
sleggja, Middle Swedish sleggia sledgehammer), related to slege beating, blow, stroke and slean to
strike (see slay (v.)). Sledgehammer is pleonastic.


tram (n.)

c.1500, beam or shaft of a barrow or sledge, also a barrow or truck body (1510s), Scottish,
originally in reference to the iron trucks used in coal mines, probably from Middle Flemish tram
beam, handle of a barrow, bar, rung, a North Sea Germanic word of unknown origin. The sense of track
for a barrow, tramway is first recorded 1826; that of streetcar is first recorded 1879, short for
tram-car car used on a tramway (1873).


tribulation (n.)

c.1200, from Old French tribulacion (12c.), from Church Latin tribulationem (nominative tribulatio)
distress, trouble, affliction, noun of action from past participle stem of tribulare to oppress,
afflict, a figurative use by Christian writers of Latin tribulare to press, also possibly to thresh
out grain, from tribulum threshing sledge, from stem of terere to rub (see throw (v.)) + -bulum,
suffix forming names of tools.


sled (n.)

early 14c., a dragged vehicle used for transport of heavy goods, from Middle Dutch sledde sled, from
Proto-Germanic *slid- (cognates: Old Saxon slido, Old Norse sle&eth;i, Danish sl&aelig;de, Swedish
sl&auml;de, Old High German slito, German Schlitten sledge), from the same root as Old English
slidan (see slide (v.)). Not found in Old English. In reference to a sleigh used for travel or
recreation, it is attested from 1580s, now mainly American English.


machete (n.)

1590s (in pseudo-Spanish form macheto), from Spanish machete, probably a diminutive of macho sledge
hammer, alteration of mazo club, which is probably [Barnhart] a dialectal variant of maza mallet,
from Vulgar Latin *mattea war club (see mace (n.1)). An alternative explanation traces macho to
Latin marculus a small hammer, diminutive of marcus hammer, from a base parallel to that of Latin
malleus (see mallet).


wagon (n.)

four-wheeled vehicle to carry heavy loads, late 15c., from Middle Dutch wagen, waghen, from Proto-
Germanic *wagnaz (cognates: Old English w&aelig;gn, Modern English wain, Old Saxon and Old High
German wagan, Old Norse vagn, Old Frisian wein, German Wagen), from PIE *wogh-no-, suffixed form of
root *wegh- to carry, to move (cognates: Sanskrit vahanam vessel, ship, Greek okhos, Latin
vehiculum, Old Church Slavonic voz&#365; carriage, chariot, Russian povozka, Lithuanian va &#382;is
a small sledge, Old Irish fen, Welsh gwain carriage, cart; see weigh).    In Dutch and German, the
general word for a wheel vehicle; English use is a result of contact through Flemish immigration,
Dutch trade, or the Continental wars. It has largely displaced the native cognate, wain. Spelling
preference varied randomly between -g- and -gg- from mid-18c., before American English settled on
the etymological wagon, while waggon remained common in Great Britain. Wagon-train is attested from
1810. Phrase on the wagon abstaining from alcohol is 1904, originally on the water cart.


