slick (n.)

1620s, a kind of cosmetic, from slick (v.). Meaning smooth place on the surface of water caused by
oil, etc. is attested from 1849. Meaning a swindler, clever person is attested from 1959.


slicker (n.)

1851, tool for smoothing leather, from slick (v.). Meaning waterproof raincoat is from 1884; sense
of clever and crafty person is from 1900.


slick (adj.)

early 14c., smooth, glossy, sleek (of skin or hair); sense of clever in deception is first recorded
1590s; that of first-class, excellent is from 1833. Related: Slickly; slickness.


slick (v.)

Old English -slician (in nigslicod newly made sleek), from Proto-Germanic *slikojan, from base
*slikaz (cognates: Old Norse slikr smooth, Old High German slihhan to glide, German schleichen to
creep, crawl, sneak, Dutch slijk mud, mire), from PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from root
*(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). Related: Slicked; slicking.


sleek (adj.)

1580s, variant of Middle English slike (see slick (adj.)). Originally of healthy-looking animal
hair; applied to persons 1630s, with sense of plump and smooth-skinned. Figurative meaning slick,
fawning, flattering is from 1590s.


sleek (v.)

make sleek, mid-15c., a variant of slick (v.). Related: Sleeked; sleeking.


bingo (n.)

lotto-like game of chance, 1936; many theories about its origin, none satisfying; the most likely is
bingo! as an exclamation of sudden realization or surprise (attested from 1923). Uncertain
connection to the slang word for brandy (1690s); attested as liquor in American English, 1861.
Thomas Chandler Haliburton (Sam Slick) in The Americans at Home (1854) recounts a story of a
drinking game in which the children's song about the farmer's dog was sung and when it came time to
spell out the name, every participant had to take a letter in turn, and anyone who missed or flubbed
had to drink.


pulp (n.)

c.1400, fleshy part of a fruit or plant, from Latin pulpa animal or plant pulp; pith of wood,
earlier *pelpa, perhaps from the same root as pulvis dust, pollen fine flour (see pollen); extended
to other similar substances by early 15c. The adjective meaning sensational is from pulp magazine
(1931), so called from pulp in sense of type of rough paper used in cheaply made magazines and books
(1727). As a genre name, pulp fiction attested by 1943 (pulp writer writer of pulp fiction was in
use by 1939). The opposite adjective in reference to magazines was slick.


city (n.)

early 13c., in medieval usage a cathedral town, but originally any settlement, regardless of size
(distinction from town is 14c., though in English it always seems to have ranked above borough),
from Old French cite town, city (10c., Modern French cit&eacute;), from earlier citet, from Latin
civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally citizenship, condition or
rights of a citizen, membership in the community, later community of citizens, state, commonwealth
(used, for instance of the Gaulish tribes), from civis townsman, from PIE root *kei- to lie; bed,
couch; homestead; beloved, dear (see cemetery).    The sense has been transferred from the
inhabitants to the place. The Latin word for city was urbs, but a resident was civis. Civitas seems
to have replaced urbs as Rome (the ultimate urbs) lost its prestige. Loss of Latin -v- is regular in
French in some situations (compare alleger from alleviare; neige from nivea; jeune from juvenis. A
different sound evolution from the Latin word yielded Italian citta, Catalan ciutat, Spanish ciudad,
Portuguese cidade.    Replaced Old English burh (see borough). London is the city from 1550s. As an
adjective from c.1300. City hall first recorded 1670s to fight city hall is 1913, American English;
city slicker first recorded 1916 (see slick); both American English. City limits is from 1825. The
newspaper city desk attested from 1878. Inner city first attested 1968. City state (also city-state)
is attested from 1877.


