slight (n.)

1550s, small amount or weight, from slight (v.). Meaning act of intentional neglect or ignoring out
of displeasure or contempt is from 1701, probably via 17c. phrase make a slight of (1610s).


slight (v.)

c.1300, make plain or smooth, from slight (adj.) Meaning treat with indifference (1590s) is  from
the adjective in sense of having little worth. Related: Slighted; slighting.


slight (adj.)

early 14c., flat, smooth; hairless, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse slettr
smooth, sleek, from Proto-Germanic *slikhtaz (cognates: Old Saxon slicht; Low German slicht smooth,
plain common; Old English -sliht level, attested in eor&eth;slihtes level with the ground; Old
Frisian sliucht smooth, slight, Middle Dutch sleht even, plain, Old High German sleht, Gothic
slaihts smooth), probably from a collateral form of PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from
root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)).    Sense evolution probably is from smooth (c.1300), to slim,
slender; of light texture, hence not good or strong; insubstantial, trifling, inferior,
insignificant (early 14c.). Meaning small in amount is from 1520s. Sense of German cognate schlecht
developed from smooth, plain, simple to bad, mean, base, and as it did it was replaced in the
original senses by schlicht, a back-formation from schlichten to smooth, to plane, a derivative of
schlecht in the old sense [Klein].


slightly (adv.)

1520s, slenderly; 1590s, in a small degree, from slight (adj.) + -ly (2).


scratch (n.)

1580s, slight skin tear produced by a sharp thing, from scratch (v.). Meaning mark or slight furrow
in metal, etc. is from 1660s. American English slang sense of money is from 1914, of uncertain
signification. Many figurative senses (such as up to scratch, originally ready to meet one's
opponent) are from sporting use for line or mark drawn as a starting place, attested from 1778 (but
the earliest use is figurative); meaning nothing (as in from scratch) is 1918, generalized from
specific 19c. sporting sense of starting point of a competitor who receives no odds in a handicap
match. Sense in billiards is from 1850. Scratch-pad is attested from 1883.


tiff (n.)

1727, outburst of temper, later petty quarrel (1754), of uncertain origin; OED suggests imitative,
from the sound of a slight puff of air or gas.


smatterer (n.)

one who has but slight or superficial knowledge, 1510s, agent noun from smatter (v.).


smattering (n.)

a slight or superficial knowledge, 1530s, verbal noun from smatter (v.).


snub (n.)

rebuke, intentional slight, 1530s, from snub (v.).


nudge (n.2)

a slight push, 1836, from nudge (v.).


micro-

word-forming element meaning small, microscopic; magnifying; one millionth, from Latinized comb.
form of Greek mikros small, little, petty, trivial, slight (see mica).


touchy (adj.)

apt to take offense at slight provocation, c.1600, perhaps an alteration of tetchy (q.v.) influenced
by touch (v.). Related: Touchiness.


chuck (n.2)

slight blow under the chin, 1610s, from chuck (v.1). Meaning a toss, a throw is from 1862. Related:
Chucked; chucking.


hair-trigger (n.)

1830, originally a secondary trigger in a firearm which sprung free a mechanism (hair) which, when
set, allowed the main trigger (n.) to be released by very slight force. Figurative use by 1841.


unpleasantness (n.)

1540s, state or quality of being unpleasant, from unpleasant + -ness. By 1835 as a slight quarrel, a
minor misunderstanding. The late unpleasantness as a humorously polite Southern description of the
American Civil War is attested from 1868.


Harlem

Manhattan district, used figuratively for African-American culture from 1934. The N.Y. community was
founded 1658 and originally named Nieuw Haarlem for Haarlem in Netherlands, which probably is from
Dutch haar height + lem silt, in reference to its position on a slight elevation on the banks of the
Spaarne River.


tinker (n.)

mender of kettles, pots, pans, etc., late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), of uncertain origin. Some
connect the word with the sound made by light hammering on metal. Tinker's damn something slight and
worthless is from 1824, probably preserving tinkers' reputation for free and casual use of
profanity; the plain and simple etymology is not good enough for some writers, and since 1877 an
ingeniously elaborate but baseless derivation has been circulated claiming the second word is really
dam.


banquet (n.)

late 15c., feast, sumptuous entertainment, from French banquet (15c.; in Old French only small
bench), from Old Italian banchetto, diminutive of banco bench; originally a snack eaten on a bench
(rather than at table), hence a slight repast between meals; the meaning has entirely reversed. As a
verb from 1510s.


cam (n.1)

a projecting part of a rotating machinery, 1777, from Dutch cam cog of a wheel, originally comb;
cognate of English comb (n.). This might have combined with English camber having a slight arch; or
the whole thing could be from camber.


soupcon (n.)

a slight trace or suggestion, 1766, from French soup&ccedil;on suspicion, from Old French
sospe&ccedil;on suspicion, worry, anxiety (12c.), from Late Latin suspectionem (see suspicion).


shave (n.)

c.1600, something shaved off; from shave (v.); Old English sceafa meant tool for shaving. Meaning
operation of shaving is from 1838. Meaning a grazing touch is recorded from 1834. Phrase a close
shave is from 1856, on notion of a slight, grazing touch.


paronym (n.)

cognate word, 1846, from Greek paronymos, formed by a slight change, from para- (see para- (1)) +
onyma (see name (n.)). Related: Paronymous (1660s).


paronomasia (n.)

pun, 1570s, from Latin, from Greek paronomasia play upon words which sound similarly, from
paronomazein to alter slightly, to call with slight change of name, literally to name beside, from
par- (see para- (1)) + onomasia naming, from onoma name (see name (n.)).


contempt (n.)

late 14c., from Latin contemptus scorn, from past participle of contemnere to scorn, despise, from
com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + *temnere to slight, scorn, of uncertain origin. Phrase contempt
of court is attested from 19c., though the idea is several centuries older.


lepton (n.)

elementary particle of small mass, 1948, from Greek leptos small, slight, slender, delicate (from
lepein to peel, from PIE *lep-; see leper) + -on. Also the name of a small coin in ancient Greece,
from neuter of leptos


denier (n.)

French coin, early 15c., from Old French dener, a small coin of slight value, roughly equivalent to
the English penny, in use in France from the time of Charlemagne to early modern times, from Latin
denarium, from denarius, name of a Roman coin (source also of Spanish dinero; see denarius).


peccadillo (n.)

slight sin, 1590s (earlier in corrupt form peccadilian, 1520s), from Spanish pecadillo, diminutive
of pecado a sin, from Latin peccatum a sin, fault, error, noun use of neuter past participle of
peccare to miss, mistake, make a mistake, do amiss; transgress, offend, be licentious, sin, perhaps
literally to stumble, from a PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, stumble, fall, related to the root of
foot (n.).


dieresis (n.)

also diaeresis, 1610s, sign marking the division of a diphthong into two simple sounds, from Late
Latin diaeresis, from Greek diairesis division, noun of action from diairein to divide, separate,
from dia- apart (see dia-) + hairein to take (see heresy). In classical prosody, the slight break in
the forward motion of a line that is felt when the end of a foot coincides with the end of a word
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry].


censure (v.)

1580s, from censure (n.) or else  from French censurer, from censure (n.). Related: Censured;
censuring.    Such men are so watchful to censure, that the have seldom much care to look for
favourable interpretations of ambiguities, to set the general tenor of life against single failures,
or to know how soon any slip of inadvertency has been expiated by sorrow and retractation; but let
fly their fulminations, without mercy or prudence, against slight offences or casual temerities,
against crimes never committed, or immediately repented. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas Browne, 1756]


scarification (n.)

c.1400, act of covering with scratches or slight cuts, from Old French scarification (14c.), from
Late Latin scarificationem (nominative scarificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
scarificare, from Latin scarifare scratch open, from Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline,
sketch, from skariphos pencil, stylus, from PIE root *skribh- to cut, separate, sift (see script
(n.)).


nuncheon (n.)

mid-14c., slight refreshment, originally taken in the afternoon, from none noon (see noon) + shench
draught, cup, from Old English scenc, related to scencan to pour out, to give to drink, cognate with
Old Frisian skenka to give to drink, German, Dutch schenken to give. Compare luncheon.


tenuous (adj.)

1590s, thin, unsubstantial, irregularly formed from Latin tenuis thin, drawn out, meager, slim,
slender, figuratively trifling, insignificant, poor, low in rank, from PIE root *ten- to stretch
(cognates: Sanskrit tanuh thin, literally stretched out; see tenet) + -ous. The correct form with
respect to the Latin is tenuious. The figurative sense of having slight importance, not substantial
is found from 1817 in English. Related: Tenuously; tenuousness.


slur (n.)

deliberate slight, disparaging or slighting remark, c.1600, from dialectal slur thin or fluid mud,
from Middle English slore (mid-15c.), cognate with Middle Low German sluren, Middle Dutch sloren to
trail in mud. Related to East Frisian sluren to go about carelessly, Norwegian slora to be careless.
Literal sense of a mark, stain, smear is from 1660s in English. The musical sense (1746) is from the
notion of sliding. Meaning act or habit of slurring in speech is from 1882.


nuance (n.)

1781, from French nuance slight difference, shade of color (17c.), from nuer to shade, from nue
cloud, from Gallo-Roman *nuba, from Latin nubes a cloud, mist, vapor, from PIE *sneudh- fog
(cognates: Avestan snaoda clouds, Latin obnubere to veil, Welsh nudd fog, Greek nython, in Hesychius
dark, dusky). According to Klein, a reference to the different colors of the clouds.


touch (n.)

c.1300, from Old French toche touch, a touching; a blow, attack; a test (Modern French touche), from
tocher to touch (see touch (v.)). Meaning slight attack (of an illness, etc.) is recorded from
1660s. Sense of communication (to be in or out of touch) is from 1884. Sense of skill or aptitude in
some topic is first recorded 1927, probably from music or the arts. Soft touch person easily
manipulated is recorded from 1940.


dab (v.)

c.1300, dabben to strike, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative. Modern sense of strike with a
slight, quick pressure developed by mid-16c., influenced by French dauber (see daub). Related:
Dabbed; dabbing. As a noun from c.1300, heavy blow with a weapon. Dab hand is British slang, 1828,
from dab expert (1690s), said to be school slang, of unknown origin, perhaps from dab in the strike
lightly sense.


pit (n.1)

hole, cavity, Old English pytt water hole, well; pit, grave, from Proto-Germanic *puttjaz pool,
puddle (cognates: Old Frisian pet, Old Saxon putti, Old Norse pyttr, Middle Dutch putte, Dutch put,
Old High German pfuzza, German Pf&uuml;tze pool, puddle), early borrowing from Latin puteus well,
pit, shaft. Meaning abode of evil spirits, hell is attested from early 13c. Pit of the stomach
(1650s) is from the slight depression there between the ribs.


scratch (v.)

c.1400, probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning to scratch, both of
uncertain origin. Related: Scratched; scratching. Billiards sense of to hit the cue ball into a
pocket is first recorded 1909 (also, originally, itch), though earlier it meant a lucky shot (1850).
Meaning to withdraw (a horse) from a race is 1865, from notion of scratching name off list of
competitors; used in a non-sporting sense of cancel a plan, etc. from 1680s. To scratch the surface
make only slight progress in penetrating or understanding is from 1882. To scratch (one's) head as a
gesture of perplexity is recorded from 1712.


shamefaced (adj.)

modest, bashful, 1550s, folk etymology alteration of shamefast, from Old English scamf&aelig;st
bashful, literally restrained by shame, or else firm in modesty, from shame (n.) + -f&aelig;st,
adjectival suffix (see fast (adj.)). Related: Shamefacedly; shamefacedness.   <b>shamefaced,
-fast</b>. It is true that the second is the original form, that -faced is due to a mistake, &amp;
that the notion attached to the word is necessarily affected in some slight degree by the change.
But those who, in the flush of this discovery, would revert to -fast in ordinary use are rightly
rewarded with the name of pedants .... [Fowler]


smack (n.1)

a taste, flavor, savor especially a slight flavor that suggests something, from Old English
sm&#230;c taste; scent, odor, from Proto-Germanic *smak- (cognates: Old Frisian smek, Middle Dutch
sm&#230;ck, Dutch smaak, Old High German smac, German Geschmack, Swedish smak, Danish smag), from a
Germanic and Baltic root *smeg- meaning to taste (cognates: Lithuanian smaguriai dainties, smagus
pleasing). Meaning a trace (of something) is attested from 1530s.


spice (n.)

c.1200, something added to food or drink to enhance the flavor, vegetable substance aromatic or
pungent to the taste, also a spice used as a medication or an alchemical ingredient, from Old French
espice (Modern French &#233;pice), from Late Latin species (plural) spices, goods, wares, in
classical Latin kind, sort (see species). From c.1300 as an aromatic spice, also spices as
commodities; from early 14c. as a spice-bearing plant. Figurative sense of attractive or enjoyable
variation is from 13c.; that of slight touch or trace of something is recorded from 1530s. Meaning
specimen, sample is from 1790. Early druggists recognized four types of spices: saffron, clove,
cinnamon, nutmeg.


blouse (n.)

1828 (from 1822 as a French word in English), from French blouse, workman's or peasant's smock
(1788), origin unknown. Perhaps akin to Proven&ccedil;al (lano) blouso short (wool) [Gamillscheg].
Another suggestion [Klein] is that it is from Medieval Latin pelusia, from Pelusium, a city in Upper
Egypt, supposedly a clothing manufacturing center in the Middle Ages.    In Paris, a very slovenly,
loose, drawn frock, with most capacious sleeves, had been introduced called a blouse. Some of our
priestesses of the toilet seemed emulous of copying this deshabille, with some slight alterations,
but we never wish to see it on the symmetrical form of a British lady. [Summary of Fashion for 1822,
in Museum of Foreign Literature and Science, Jan.-June 1823]


slim (adj.)

1650s, thin, slight, slender, from Dutch slim bad, sly, clever, from Middle Dutch slim bad, crooked,
from Proto-Germanic *slembaz oblique, crooked (cognates: Middle High German slimp slanting, awry,
German schlimm bad, cunning, unwell). In English 17c. also sometimes with a sense sly, cunning,
crafty. Related: Slimly; slimness. With obsolete extended adjectival forms Slimsy flimsy,
unsubstantial (1845); slimikin small and slender (1745). Slim Jim attested from 1887 in sense of
very thin person; from 1902 as a type of slender cigar; from 1975 as a brand of meat snack.


scalper (n.)

1650s as a type of surgical instrument; 1760 as one who removes scalps, agent noun from scalp (v.).
Meaning person who re-sells tickets at unauthorized prices for a profit, 1869, American English;
earliest reference is to theater tickets, but often used late 19c. of brokers who sold unused
portions of railway tickets. [Railways charged less per mile for longer-distance tickets; therefore
someone travelling from New York to Chicago could buy a ticket all the way to San Francisco, get out
at Chicago and sell it to a scalper, and come away with more money than if he had simply bought a
ticket to Chicago; the Chicago scalper would hold the ticket till he found someone looking for a
ticket to San Francisco, then sell it to him at a slight advance, but for less than the official
price.] Perhaps from scalp (v.); scalper was a generic term for con man, cheater in late 19c. Or
perhaps the connecting sense is the bounty offered for scalps of certain destructive animals
(attested in New England from 1703) and sometimes Indians (i.e., having only part of something, but
still getting paid). Some, though, see a connection rather to scalpel, the surgical instrument.


son (n.)

Old English sunu son, descendant, from Proto-Germanic *sunuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian
sunu, Old Norse sonr, Danish s&oslash;n, Swedish son, Middle Dutch sone, Dutch zoon, Old High German
sunu, German Sohn, Gothic sunus son). The Germanic words are from PIE *su(e)-nu- son (cognates:
Sanskrit sunus, Greek huios, Avestan hunush, Armenian ustr, Lithuanian sunus, Old Church Slavonic
synu, Russian and Polish syn son), a derived noun from root *seue- (1) to give birth (cognates:
Sanskrit sauti gives birth, Old Irish suth birth, offspring).   Son of _____ as the title of a
sequel to a book or movie is recorded from 1917 (Son of Tarzan). Most explanations for son of a gun
(1708) are more than a century after its appearance. Henley (1903) describes it as meaning
originally a soldier's bastard; Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book (1867) describes it as An epithet
conveying contempt in a slight degree, and originally applied to boys born afloat, when women were
permitted to accompany their husbands to sea ....


pretty (adj.)

Old English pr&aelig;ttig (West Saxon), pretti (Kentish), *prettig (Mercian) cunning, skillful,
artful, wily, astute, from pr&aelig;tt, *prett a trick, wile, craft, from Proto-Germanic *pratt-
(cognates: Old Norse prettr a trick, prettugr tricky; Frisian pret, Middle Dutch perte, Dutch pret
trick, joke, Dutch prettig sportive, funny, Flemish pertig brisk, clever), of unknown origin.
Connection between Old English and Middle English words is uncertain, but if they are the same,
meaning had shifted by c.1400 to manly, gallant, and later moved via attractive, skillfully made, to
fine, to beautiful in a slight way (mid-15c.). Ironical use from 1530s. For sense evolution, compare
nice, silly. Also used of bees (c.1400). After the OE. period the word is unknown till the 15th c.,
when it becomes all at once frequent in various senses, none identical with the OE., though
derivable from it [OED].     Meaning not a few, considerable is from late 15c. With a sense of
moderately, qualifying adjectives and adverbs, since 1560s. Pretty please as an emphatic plea is
attested from 1902. A pretty penny lot of money is first recorded 1768.


slut (n.)

c.1400, a dirty, slovenly, or untidy woman, according to OED Of doubtful origin, but probably
cognate with dialectal German Schlutt slovenly woman, dialectal Swedish slata idle woman, slut, and
Dutch slodde slut, slodder a careless man, but the exact relationship of all these is obscure.
Chaucer uses sluttish (late 14c.) in reference to the appearance of an untidy man. Also a kitchen
maid, a drudge (mid-15c.; hard pieces in a bread loaf from imperfect kneading were called slut's
pennies, 18c.).    Specific modern sense of woman who enjoys sex in a degree considered shamefully
excessive is by 1966. Meaning woman of loose character, bold hussy is attested from mid-15c., but
the primary association through 18c. was untidiness. Johnson has it (second definition) as A word of
slight contempt to a woman but sexual activity does not seem to figure into his examples. Playful
use of the word, without implication of messiness or loose morals, is attested by 1660s:    My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most
admirable slut, and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others, and deserves wages
better. [Pepys, diary, Feb. 21, 1664]    Compare playful use of scamp, etc., for boys. Sometimes
used 19c. as a euphemism for bitch to describe a female dog.    There is a group of North Sea
Germanic words in sl- that mean sloppy, and also slovenly woman and, less often, slovenly man, and
that tend to evolve toward woman of loose morals. Compare slattern, also English dialectal slummock
a dirty, untidy, or slovenly person (1861), variant of slammacks slatternly woman, said to be from
slam ill-shaped, shambling fellow. Also slammakin (from 1756 as a type of loose gown; 1785 as
slovenly female, 1727 as a character name in Gay's Beggar's Opera), with variants slamkin,
slammerkin. Also possibly related are Middle Dutch slore a sluttish woman, Dutch slomp, German
schlampe a slattern.


ghost (n.)

Old English gast soul, spirit, life, breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon, from Proto-Germanic
*ghoizdoz (cognates: Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German
Geist spirit, ghost), from PIE root *gheis- to be excited, amazed, frightened (cognates: Sanskrit
hedah wrath; Avestan zaesha- horrible, frightful; Gothic usgaisjan, Old English g&aelig;stan to
frighten). This was the usual West Germanic word for supernatural being, and the primary sense seems
to have been connected to the idea of to wound, tear, pull to pieces. The surviving Old English
senses, however, are in Christian writing, where it is used to render Latin spiritus (see spirit
(n.)), a sense preserved in Holy Ghost. Modern sense of disembodied spirit of a dead person is
attested from late 14c. and returns the word toward its ancient sense.    Most Indo-European words
for soul, spirit also double with reference to supernatural spirits. Many have a base sense of
appearance (such as Greek phantasma; French spectre; Polish widmo, from Old Church Slavonic videti
to see; Old English scin, Old High German giskin, originally appearance, apparition, related to Old
English scinan, Old High German skinan to shine). Other concepts are in French revenant, literally
returning (from the other world), Old Norse aptr-ganga, literally back-comer. Breton bugelnoz is
literally night-child. Latin manes probably is a euphemism.    The gh- spelling appeared early 15c.
in Caxton, influenced by Flemish and Middle Dutch gheest, but was rare in English before mid-16c.
Sense of slight suggestion (in ghost image, ghost of a chance, etc.) is first recorded 1610s; that
in ghost writing is from 1884, but that term is not found until 1919. Ghost town is from 1908. To
give up the ghost die was in Old English. Ghost in the machine was Gilbert Ryle's term (1949) for
the mind viewed as separate from the body.


