sloth (n.)

late 12c., indolence, sluggishness, formed from Middle English slou, slowe (see slow (adj.)) +
abstract formative -th (2). Replaced Old English sl&aelig;w&eth; sloth, indolence. Sense of
slowness, tardiness is from mid-14c. As one of the deadly sins, it translates Latin accidia.    The
slow-moving mammal first so called 1610s, a translation of Portuguese pregui&ccedil;a slowness,
slothfulness, from Latin pigritia laziness (compare Spanish perezosa slothful, also the sloth).


slothful (adj.)

c.1400, from sloth + -ful. Related: Slothfully; slothfulness. For the latter, Middle English also
had sloth-head (c.1300), with Middle English -hede, cognate with -hood.


negligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French negligence negligence, sloth; injury, injustice (12c.), and directly from
Latin neclegentia, neglegentia carelessness, heedlessness, neglect, from neglegentem (nominative
neglegens) heedless, careless, unconcerned, present participle of neglegere to neglect (see neglect
(v.)).


site (n.)

place or position occupied by something, especially with reference to environment, late 14c., from
Anglo-French site, Old French site place, site; position, and directly from Latin situs a place,
position, situation, location, station; idleness, sloth, inactivity; forgetfulness; the effects of
neglect, from past participle of sinere let, leave alone, permit, from PIE *si-tu-, from root *tkei-
to settle, dwell, be home (see home (n.)).


white (n.)

Old English hwit whiteness, white food, white of an egg, from white (adj.). Also in late Old English
a highly luminous color devoid of chroma. Meaning white part of the eyeball is from c.1400. Meaning
white man, person of a race distinguished by light complexion is from 1670s; white man in this sense
is from 1690s. White man's burden is from Kipling's 1899 poem.    Take up the White Man's burden--
The savage wars of peace--  Fill full the mouth of Famine  And bid the sickness cease;  And when
your goal is nearest  The end for others sought,  Watch sloth and heathen Folly  Bring all your
hopes to nought.


