slovenly (adj.)

1510s, low, base, lewd, later untidy, dirty (1560s), from sloven + -ly (1). Related: Slovenliness;
also in this sense was slovenry (1540s), which OED reports in common use early 17c.


slut (n.)

c.1400, a dirty, slovenly, or untidy woman, according to OED Of doubtful origin, but probably
cognate with dialectal German Schlutt slovenly woman, dialectal Swedish slata idle woman, slut, and
Dutch slodde slut, slodder a careless man, but the exact relationship of all these is obscure.
Chaucer uses sluttish (late 14c.) in reference to the appearance of an untidy man. Also a kitchen
maid, a drudge (mid-15c.; hard pieces in a bread loaf from imperfect kneading were called slut's
pennies, 18c.).    Specific modern sense of woman who enjoys sex in a degree considered shamefully
excessive is by 1966. Meaning woman of loose character, bold hussy is attested from mid-15c., but
the primary association through 18c. was untidiness. Johnson has it (second definition) as A word of
slight contempt to a woman but sexual activity does not seem to figure into his examples. Playful
use of the word, without implication of messiness or loose morals, is attested by 1660s:    My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most
admirable slut, and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others, and deserves wages
better. [Pepys, diary, Feb. 21, 1664]    Compare playful use of scamp, etc., for boys. Sometimes
used 19c. as a euphemism for bitch to describe a female dog.    There is a group of North Sea
Germanic words in sl- that mean sloppy, and also slovenly woman and, less often, slovenly man, and
that tend to evolve toward woman of loose morals. Compare slattern, also English dialectal slummock
a dirty, untidy, or slovenly person (1861), variant of slammacks slatternly woman, said to be from
slam ill-shaped, shambling fellow. Also slammakin (from 1756 as a type of loose gown; 1785 as
slovenly female, 1727 as a character name in Gay's Beggar's Opera), with variants slamkin,
slammerkin. Also possibly related are Middle Dutch slore a sluttish woman, Dutch slomp, German
schlampe a slattern.


slutty (adj.)

c.1400, dirty, slovenly, from slut + -ish.


slipshod (adj.)

1570s, wearing slippers or loose shoes, from slip (v.) + shod wearing shoes. Sense of slovenly,
careless is from 1815, probably from the notion of appearing like one in slippers, or whose shoes
are down at the heels.


fuddle (v.)

1580s, originally to get drunk, later to confuse as though with drink (c.1600), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Low German fuddeln work in a slovenly manner (as if drunk), from fuddle worthless
cloth. The more common derivative befuddle appeared 1887. Related: Fuddled; fuddling.


slattern (n.)

1630s, a woman negligent or disordered in her dress or household, of uncertain origin, probably
related to Low German Slattje, Dutch slodder, dialectal Swedish slata slut (in the older, non-sexual
sense; compare slut). Compare dialectal English verb slatter to spill or splash awkwardly, to waste,
used of women or girls considered untidy or slovenly.


sloppy (adj.)

1727, muddy, from slop (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning loose, ill-fitting, slovenly is first recorded 1825,
influenced by slop (n.2). Related: Sloppily; sloppiness. Sloppy Joe was originally loose-fitting
sweater worn by girls (1942); as a name for a kind of spiced hamburger, it is attested from 1961.


trollop

1610s, slovenly woman, often with implications of moral looseness, probably from troll (v.) in sense
of roll about, wallow.[A] certain Anne Hayward, wife of Gregory Hayward of Beighton, did in the
parishe church of Beighton aforesaid in the time of Divine Service or Sermon there, and when the
Minister was reading &amp; praying, violently &amp; boisterously presse &amp; enter into the seat or
place where one Elizabeth, wife of Robert Spurlinir, was quietly at her Devotion &amp; Duty to
Almighty God and then and there did quarrel chide &amp; braule &amp; being evilly &amp; inalitiously
bent did use then and there many rayleing opprobrious Speeches &amp; Invectives against the said
Elizabeth calling her Tripe &amp; Trallop, to the great disturbance both of the Minister and
Congregation. [Archdeaconry of Sudbury, Suffolk, Court Proceedings, 1682]


blouse (n.)

1828 (from 1822 as a French word in English), from French blouse, workman's or peasant's smock
(1788), origin unknown. Perhaps akin to Proven&ccedil;al (lano) blouso short (wool) [Gamillscheg].
Another suggestion [Klein] is that it is from Medieval Latin pelusia, from Pelusium, a city in Upper
Egypt, supposedly a clothing manufacturing center in the Middle Ages.    In Paris, a very slovenly,
loose, drawn frock, with most capacious sleeves, had been introduced called a blouse. Some of our
priestesses of the toilet seemed emulous of copying this deshabille, with some slight alterations,
but we never wish to see it on the symmetrical form of a British lady. [Summary of Fashion for 1822,
in Museum of Foreign Literature and Science, Jan.-June 1823]


