sluggish (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle English slugge lazy person (see sluggard) + -ish. Earlier adjective was sluggi
(early 13c.). Related: Sluggishly; sluggishness.


sluggard (n.)

late 14c., late 13c. as a surname, habitually lazy person, from Middle English sluggi sluggish,
indolent, probably from a Scandinavian word such as dialectal Norwegian slugga be sluggish,
dialectal Norwegian sluggje heavy, slow person, dialectal Swedish slogga to be slow or sluggish.
Adjective sluggy is attested in English from early 13c.    'Tis the voice of a sluggard -- I heard
him complain:  You have wak'd me too soon, I must slumber again.  [Isaac Watts, 1674-1748]   <hr />
'Tis the voice of the Lobster: I heard him declare  You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my
hair.  [Lewis Carroll (Charles L. Dodgson), 1832-1898]     As an adjective meaning sluggish, lazy
from 1590s. Related: Sluggardly.


late (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;t occurring after the customary or expected time, originally slow, sluggish,
from Proto-Germanic *lata- (cognates: Old Norse latr sluggish, lazy, Middle Dutch, Old Saxon lat,
German la&szlig; idle, weary, Gothic lats weary, sluggish, lazy, latjan to hinder), from PIE *led-
slow, weary (cognates: Latin lassus faint, weary, languid, exhausted, Greek ledein to be weary),
from root *le- to let go, slacken (see let (v.)).    The sense of deceased (as in the late Mrs.
Smith) is from late 15c., from an adverbial sense of recently. Of women's menstrual periods,
attested colloquially from 1962. Related: Lateness. As an adverb, from Old English late.


dawdle (v.)

1650s, perhaps a variant of daddle to walk unsteadily. Perhaps influenced by daw, because the bird
was regarded as sluggish and silly. Not in general use until c.1775. Related: Dawdled; dawdling.


loggy (adj.)

heavy, sluggish, 1847, from log (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Logginess.


lately (adv.)

Old English l&aelig;tlice slow, sluggish; see late (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning within recent times is
from late 15c., probably a new formation.


oscitant (adj.)

yawning, from Latin oscitans listless, sluggish, lazy, present participle of oscitare to gape, yawn,
from os citare to move the mouth (see oral and cite).


tardation (n.)

slowness, c.1500, from Late Latin tardationem (nominative tardatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of tardare to slow, related to tardus slow, sluggish (see tardy).


torpid (adj.)

1610s, benumbed, without feeling or power, from Latin torpidus benumbed, stupefied, from torpere be
numb or stiff (see torpor). Figurative sense of sluggish, dull, apathetic is from 1650s. Related:
Torpidly; torpidness.


lento

slowly (musical direction), 1724, from Italian lento slow, from Latin lentus flexible, pliant, slow,
sluggish (see lithe). Related: Lentissimo.


saturnine (adj.)

gloomy, morose, sluggish, grave, mid-15c., literally born under the influence of the planet Saturn,
from Middle English Saturne (see Saturn) + -ine (1). Medieval physiology believed these
characteristics to be caused by the astrological influence of the planet Saturn, which was the most
remote from the Sun (in the limited knowledge of the times) and thus coldest and slowest in its
revolution.


logy (adj.)

dull and heavy, 1848, American English, perhaps from Dutch log heavy, dull + -y (2); compare Middle
Low German luggich sleepy, sluggish. Or perhaps a variant of loggy.


slow (v.)

1550s, make slower; 1590s, go slower, from slow (adj.). Related: Slowed; slowing. Old English had
slawian (intransitive) to be or become slow, be sluggish, but the modern use appears to be a 16c.
re-formation.


inert (adj.)

1640s, from French inerte (16c.) or directly from Latin inertem (nominative iners) unskilled,
inactive, helpless, sluggish, worthless, from in- without + ars (genitive artis) skill (see art
(n.)). Originally of matter; specifically of gases from 1885. Of persons or creatures, from 1774.


faint (adj.)

c.1300, wanting in courage, now mostly in faint-hearted (mid-15c.), from Old French feint soft,
weak, sluggish, past participle of feindre hesitate, falter, be indolent, show weakness, avoid one's
duty by pretending (see feign). Sense of weak, feeble is early 14c. Meaning producing a feeble
impression upon the senses is from 1650s.


maze (n.)

c.1300, delusion, bewilderment (also as a verb, stupefy, daze), possibly from Old English
*m&aelig;s, which is suggested by the compound amasod amazed and verb amasian to confound, confuse
(see amaze). Perhaps related to Norwegian dialectal mas exhausting labor, Swedish masa to be slow or
sluggish. Meaning labyrinth first recorded late 14c.


heartless (adj.)

Old English heortleas dispirited, dejected; see heart + -less. In Middle English with expanded
senses lacking in courage; foolish; listless; half-hearted; sluggish. Sense of callous, cruel is not
certainly attested before Shelley used it in 1816. Literal meaning lacking a heart, lifeless (mid-
15c.) is rare. Related: Heartlessly; heartlessness.


crass (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French crasse (16c.), from Latin crassus solid, thick, fat; dense. The literal
sense always has been rare in English; meaning grossly stupid is recorded from 1650s, from French.
Middle English had cras (adj.) slow, sluggish, tardy (mid-15c.), also crassitude thickness. Related:
Crassly; crassness.


retardation (n.)

early 15c., fact or action of making slower in movement or time, from Latin retardationem
(nominative retardatio) a delaying, noun of action from past participle stem of retardare to make
slow, delay, keep back, hinder, from re- (see re-), + tardare to slow, related to tardus slow,
sluggish (see tardy). Sense of educational slowness is from 1907.


lassitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lassitude (14c.), from Latin lassitudinem (nominative lassitudo)
faintness, weariness, from lassus faint, tired, weary, from PIE *led- slow, weary (source also of
Old English l&aelig;t sluggish, slow; see late (adj.)), from root *le- to let go, slacken (see
lenient).


let (n.)

stoppage, obstruction (obsolete unless in legal contracts), late 12c., from archaic verb letten to
hinder, from Old English lettan hinder, delay, from Proto-Germanic *latjan (cognates: Old Saxon
lettian to hinder, Old Norse letja to hold back, Old High German lezzen to stop, check, Gothic
latjan to hinder, make late, Old English l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, late); see late.


lax (adj.)

c.1400, loose (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus wide, loose, open, figuratively loose,
free, wide, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (cognates: Greek legein to leave off,
stop, lagos hare, literally with drooping ears, lagnos lustful, lascivious, lagaros slack, hollow,
shrunken; Latin languere to be faint, weary, languidis faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid). Of
rules, discipline, etc., attested from mid-15c.


sulky (adj.)

quietly sullen, 1744, of uncertain origin. Connection has been suggested to obsolete, rare sulke
hard to sell (1630s) and to Old English asolcen idle, lazy, slow, past participle adjective from
aseolcan become sluggish, be weak or idle (related to besylcan be languid), from Proto-Germanic
*seklan (cognates: Middle High German selken to drop, fall). But words of similar meaning often are
held to be imitative (compare miff, mope, boudoir). Related: Sulkily; sulkiness.


slow (adj.)

Old English slaw inactive, sluggish, torpid, lazy, also not clever, from Proto-Germanic
*sl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old Saxon sleu blunt, dull, Middle Dutch slee, Dutch sleeuw sour, tart,
blunt, Old High German sleo blunt, dull, Old Norse sljor, Danish sl&oslash;v, Swedish sl&ouml;
blunt, dull). Meaning taking a long time is attested from early 13c. Meaning dull, tedious is from
1841. As an adverb c.1500. The slows imaginary disease to account for lethargy is from 1843.


slack (adj.)

Old English sl&aelig;c remiss, lax, characterized by lack of energy, sluggish, indolent, languid;
slow, gentle, easy, from Proto-Germanic *slakas (cognates: Old Saxon slak, Old Norse slakr, Old High
German slah slack, Middle Dutch lac fault, lack), from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax).
Sense of not tight (in reference to things) is first recorded c.1300. As an adverb from late 14c.
Slack-key (1975) translates Hawaiian ki ho'alu. Slack water (n.) time when tide is not flowing is
from 1769. Slack-handed remiss is from 1670s. Slack-baked baked imperfectly, half-baked is from
1823; figuratively from 1840.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


tardy (adj.)

1520s, slow, from Old French tardif slow, late (12c.), also the name of the snail character in the
Roman de Renart, from Vulgar Latin *tardivus, from Latin tardus slow, sluggish; late; dull, stupid,
of unknown origin. Meaning late in English is from 1660s.    This word, not much used in English
prose, is constantly employed in the U.S. and in Canada with reference to lateness in school-
attendance. [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]    Related: Tardily; tardiness. Earlier form of the
word in English was tardif, tardyve (late 15c.). Tardity slowness of movement or action is recorded
in English from early 15c., from Old French tardete, from Latin tarditas.


moron (n.)

1910, medical Latin, from Greek (Attic) moron, neuter of moros foolish, dull, sluggish, stupid,
probably cognate with Sanskrit murah idiotic. Latin morus foolish is a loan-word from Greek. Adopted
by the American Association for the Study of the Feeble-minded with a technical definition adult
with a mental age between 8 and 12; used as an insult since 1922 and subsequently dropped from
technical use. Linn&aelig;us had introduced morisis idiocy.    The feeble-minded may be divided
into: (1) Those who are totally arrested before the age of three so that they show the attainment of
a two-year-old child or less; these are the idiots. (2) Those so retarded that they become
permanently arrested between the ages of three and seven; these are imbeciles. (3) Those so retarded
that they become arrested between the ages of seven and twelve; these were formerly called feeble-
minded, the same term that is applied to the whole group. We are now proposing to call them morons,
this word being the Greek for fool. The English word fool as formerly used describes exactly this
grade of child--one who is deficient in judgment or sense. [Henry H. Goddard, in Journal of
Proceedings and Addresses of the National Education Association of the United States, July 1910]


