smear (v.)

Old English smerian, smierwan to anoint or rub with grease, oil, etc., from Proto-Germanic *smerwjan
to spread grease on (cognates: Old Norse smyrja to anoint, rub with ointment, Danish sm&oslash;re,
Swedish sm&ouml;rja, Dutch smeren, Old High German smirwen apply salve, smear, German schmieren to
smear; Old Norse sm&#246;r butter), from PIE *smeru- grease (cognates: Greek myron unguent, balsam,
Old Irish smi(u)r marrow, Old English smeoru fat, grease, ointment, tallow, lard, suet, Lithuanian
smarsas fat).    Figurative sense of assault a public reputation with unsubstantiated charges is
from 1879. Related: Smeared; smearing. Smear-word, one used regardless of its literal meaning but
invested with invective, is from 1938.


smear-case (n.)

1829, semi-translation of German Schmier-k&#228;se; see smear (v.) + cheese (n.).


smear (n.)

mark or stain left by smearing, 1610s, from smear (v.). Sense of small quantity prepared for
microscopic examination is from 1903. Meaning a quantity of cream cheese, etc., smeared on a bagel
is by 1999, from Yiddish shmir. The earliest noun sense in English is fat, grease, ointment
(c.1200), from Old English had smeoru fat, grease, cognate with Middle Dutch smere, Dutch smeer,
German Schmer grease, fat (Yiddish schmir), Danish sm&oslash;r, Swedish sm&#246;r butter.


schmear (n.)

1961, bribery, from Yiddish shmir spread, from shmirn to grease, smear, from Middle High German
smiren, from Old High German smirwen to smear (see smear (v.); compare slang to grease (someone's)
palm to bribe). Phrase the whole schmear the entire affair is attested from 1969, originally show
business jargon,


smarm (n.)

1914, from colloquial verb smalm, smarm to smear, bedaub (the hair, with pomade), 1847, of unknown
origin, perhaps somehow suggestive of the action. Verbal meaning to smear with flattery is from
1902.


smite (v.)

to hit, strike, beat, mid-12c., from Old English smitan, which however is attested only as to daub,
smear on; soil, pollute, blemish, defile (strong verb, past tense smat, past participle smiten),
from Proto-Germanic *smitan (cognates: Swedish smita, Danish smide to smear, fling, Old Frisian
smita, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch smiten to cast, fling, Dutch smijten to throw, Old High
German smizan to rub, strike, German schmei&szlig;en to cast, fling, Gothic bismeitan to spread,
smear). The development of the various senses is not quite clear, but that of throwing is perh. the
original one [OED]. Watkins suggests the semantic channel may have been slapping mud on walls in
wattle and daub construction and connects it with PIE *sme- to smear; Klein's sources also say this.
Sense of slay in combat (c.1300) is from Biblical expression smite to death, first attested c.1200.
Meaning visit disastrously is mid-12c., also Biblical. Meaning strike with passion or emotion is
from c.1300.


smegma (n.)

sebaceous secretion, 1819, from Latin, from Greek smegma a detergent, soap, unguent, from smekhein
to wipe off, wipe clean, cleanse, from PIE root *sme- to smear (cognates: Czech smetana cream, and
see smear (v.)). So called from resemblance; a medical coinage, the word seems not to have been used
in its literal Greek sense in English before this. Related: Smegmatic.


anoint (v.)

c.1300 (implied in anointing), from Old French enoint smeared on, past participle of enoindre smear
on, from Latin inunguere to anoint, from in- on + unguere to smear (see unguent). Originally in
reference to grease or oil smeared on for medicinal purposes; its use in the Coverdale Bible in
reference to Christ (as in The Lord's Anointed; see chrism) has spiritualized the word. Related:
Anointed; anointing.


blur (n.)

1540s, smear on the surface of writing; perhaps akin to blear. Extended sense of confused dimness is
from 1860.


smirch (n.)

1680s, a soiling mark or smear, from smirch (v.). Figurative use by 1862.


slur (v.)

c.1600, smear, soil by smearing, from slur (n.). Meaning disparage depreciate is from 1650s. In
music, from 1746; of speech, from 1893. Related: Slurred; slurring.


tar (v.)

late Old English, to smear with tar, from tar (n.1). To tar and feather (1769) was famously a mob
action in America in Revolutionary times (used by both sides) and several decades thereafter. The
punishment itself first is found in an ordinance of Richard I (1189) as the penalty in the Crusader
navy for theft. Among other applications over the years was its use in 1623 by a bishop on a party
of incontinent friars and nuns [OED], but the verbal phrase is not attested until 18c. Related:
Tarred; tarring.


liniment (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin linimentum a soft ointment, from Latin linire, collateral form of
earlier linere to daub, smear, from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (see slime (n.)).


smudge (v.)

early 15c., smogen to soil, stain, blacken, of obscure origin. Related: Smudged; smudging. Meaning
make a smoky fire is from 1860, hence smudge-pot (1903). The noun meaning a stain, spot, smear is
first attested 1768, from the verb.


slubberdegullion (n.)

a slobbering or dirty fellow, a worthless sloven, 1610s, from slubber to daub, smear; behave
carelessly or negligently (1520s), probably from Dutch or Low German (compare slobber (v.)). Second
element appears to be an attempt to imitate French; or perhaps it is French, related to Old French
goalon a sloven. Century Dictionary speculates the -de- means insignificant or else is from
hobbledehoy.


besmear (v.)

Old English bismierwan, besmyrwan (West Saxon), besmerwan (Anglian); see be- + smear (v.). Related:
Besmeared; besmearing.


smirch (v.)

late 15c., to discolor, to make dirty, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French esmorcher to
torture, perhaps also befoul, stain, from es- out (see ex-) + morcher to bite, from Latin morsus,
past participle of mordere to bite (see mordant). Sense perhaps influenced by smear. Sense of
dishonor, disgrace, discredit first attested 1820.


delete (v.)

late 15c., destroy, eradicate, from Latin deletus, past participle of delere destroy, blot out,
efface, from delevi, originally perfective tense of delinere to daub, erase by smudging (as of the
wax on a writing table), from de- from, away (see de-) + linere to smear, wipe (see lime (n.1)). In
English, specifically of written matter, from c.1600. Related: Deleted; deleting.


slur (n.)

deliberate slight, disparaging or slighting remark, c.1600, from dialectal slur thin or fluid mud,
from Middle English slore (mid-15c.), cognate with Middle Low German sluren, Middle Dutch sloren to
trail in mud. Related to East Frisian sluren to go about carelessly, Norwegian slora to be careless.
Literal sense of a mark, stain, smear is from 1660s in English. The musical sense (1746) is from the
notion of sliding. Meaning act or habit of slurring in speech is from 1882.


unguent (n.)

ointment, early 15c., from Latin unguentem ointment, from stem of unguere to anoint or smear with
ointment, from PIE root *ongw- to salve, anoint (cognates: Sanskrit anakti anoints, smears, Armenian
aucanem I anoint, Old Prussian anctan butter, Old High German ancho, German anke butter, Old Irish
imb, Welsh ymenyn butter).


grime (n.)

1580s, of uncertain origin, probably alteration of Middle English grim dirt, filth (early 14c.),
from Middle Low German greme dirt, from Proto-Germanic *grim- to smear (cognates: Flemish grijm,
Middle Dutch grime soot, mask), from PIE root *ghrei- to rub. The verb was Middle English grymen
(mid-15c.) but was replaced early 16c. by begrime.


clammy (adj.)

soft and sticky, late 14c., probably from Middle English clam viscous, sticky, muddy (mid-14c.),
from Old English cl&aelig;m mud, sticky clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaimaz clay (cognates: Flemish
klammig, Low German klamig sticky, damp, Old English cl&aelig;man to smear, plaster; cognates:
clay). With -y (2). Related: Clammily; clamminess.


macerate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from maceration or else from Latin maceratus, past participle of
macerare soften, make soft, soak, steep, related to maceria garden wall, originally of kneaded clay,
from PIE *mak-ero-, suffixed form of root *mag- to knead (cognates: Greek magis kneaded mass, cake,
mageus one who kneads, baker; Old Church Slavonic mazo to anoint, smear; Breton meza to knead;
Middle Irish maistir to churn), also to fashion, fit (compare make (v.)). Related: Macerated;
macerating.


pollution (n.)

mid-14c., discharge of semen other than during sex, later, desecration, defilement (late 14c.), from
Late Latin pollutionem (nominative pollutio) defilement, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin polluere to soil, defile, contaminate, from por- before + -luere smear, from PIE root *leu-
dirt; make dirty (cognates: Latin lutum mud, mire, clay, lues filth; Greek lyma filth, dirt,
disgrace, lymax rubbish, refuse; Old Irish loth mud, dirt; Lithuanian lutynas pool, puddle). Sense
of contamination of the environment first recorded c.1860, but not common until c.1955.


lime (n.1)

chalky mineral used in making mortar, from Old English lim sticky substance, birdlime, mortar,
cement, gluten, from Proto-Germanic *leimaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Danish lim, Dutch lijm,
German Leim birdlime), from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (cognates: Latin limus slime,
mud, mire, linere to smear; see slime (n.)). Lime is made by putting limestone or shells in a red
heat, which burns off the carbonic acid and leaves a brittle white solid which dissolves easily in
water. Hence lime-kiln (late 13c.), lime-burner (early 14c.). As a verb, c.1200, from the noun.


preen (v.)

to trim, to dress up, late 14c., perhaps a variation of Middle English proynen, proinen trim the
feather with the beak (see prune (v.)); or perhaps from Old French poroindre anoint before, and Old
French proignier round off, prune. Middle English prene (from Old English preon, a general Germanic
word) meant to pin, and probably influenced the form of this word. Watkins, however, connects it
with Latin unguere to smear, anoint.    Because of the popularity of falconry, bird activities
formerly were more closely observed and words for them were more precise in English than today.Youre
hawke proynith and not pikith and she prenyth not bot whan she begynnyth at hir leggys, and fetcheth
moystour like oyle at hir taill. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


dough (n.)

Old English dag dough, from Proto-Germanic *daigaz something kneaded (cognates: Old Norse deig,
Swedish deg, Middle Dutch deech, Dutch deeg, Old High German teic, German Teig, Gothic daigs dough),
from PIE *dheigh- to build, to form, to knead (cognates: Sanskrit dehah body, literally that which
is formed, dih- to besmear; Greek teikhos wall; Latin fingere to form, fashion, figura a shape,
form, figure; Gothic deigan to smear; Old Irish digen firm, solid, originally kneaded into a compact
mass). Meaning money is from 1851.


kitsch (n.)

1926, from German kitsch, literally gaudy, trash, from dialectal kitschen to smear.    What we
English people call ugliness in German art is simply the furious reaction against what Germans call
s&uuml;sses Kitsch, the art of the picture postcard, and of what corresponds to the royalty ballad.
It has for years been their constant reproach against us that England is the great country of
Kitsch. Many years ago a German who loved England only too well said to me, 'I like your English
word plain; it is a word for which we have no equivalent in German, because all German women are
plain.' He might well have balanced it by saying that English has no equivalent for the word Kitsch.
[Edward J. Dent, The Music of Arnold Sch&ouml;nberg, The Living Age, July 9, 1921]


smorgasbord (n.)

1893, from Swedish sm&ouml;rg&#229;sbord, literally butter-goose table, from sm&ouml;rg&#229;s,
slice of bread and butter, compounded from sm&#246;r butter (see smear (n.)) and g&#229;s, literally
goose (and from the same Germanic root that yielded English goose (n.)).    [Sm&ouml;rg&#229;s]
properly signifies a slice of bread-and-butter; and has come by custom--in much the same way as when
we familiarly speak of taking a sandwich for partaking of some light refreshment--to be applied
synecdochically to the preliminary relish or appetizer partaken of before meals. [Notes and Queries,
Nov. 15, 1884]     The final element is bord table, from Proto-Germanic *burdam plank, board, table
(see board (n.1)). Figurative sense of medley, miscellany is recorded from 1948.


slime (n.)

Old English slim slime, from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (cognates: Old Norse slim, Old Frisian slym,
Dutch slijm slime, phlegm, German Schleim slime), probably related to Old English lim birdlime;
sticky substance, from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (cognates: Sanskrit linati sticks,
stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears; Russian slimak snail; Old Church Slavonic slina spittle;
Old Irish sligim to smear, leinam I follow, literally I stick to; Welsh llyfn smooth; Greek leimax
snail, limne marsh, pool, lake, alinein to anoint, besmear; Latin limus slime, mud, mire, linere to
daub, besmear, rub out, erase). As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Slime-mold is from 1880.


leave (v.)

Old English l&aelig;fan to let remain; remain; have left; bequeath, from Proto-Germanic *laibijan
(cognates: Old Frisian leva to leave, Old Saxon farlebid left over), causative of *liban remain,
(source of Old English belifan, German bleiben, Gothic bileiban to remain), from root *laf- remnant,
what remains, from PIE *leip- to stick, adhere; also fat.    The Germanic root has only the sense
remain, continue, which also is in Greek lipares persevering, importunate. But this usually is
regarded as a development from the primary PIE sense of adhere, be sticky (compare Lithuanian lipti,
Old Church Slavonic lipet to adhere, Greek lipos grease, Sanskrit rip-/lip- to smear, adhere to.
Seemingly contradictory meaning of depart (early 13c.) comes from notion of to leave behind (as in
to leave the earth to die; to leave the field retreat).


cottage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cote hut, cottage + Anglo-French suffix -age (probably denoting the
entire property attached to a cote). Old French cot is probably from Old Norse kot hut, cognate of
Old English cot, cote cottage, hut, from Proto-Germanic *kutan (cognates: Middle Dutch cot, Dutch
kot).    Meaning small country residence (without suggestion of poverty or tenancy) is from 1765.
Modern French cottage is a 19c. reborrowing from English. Cottage industry is attested from 1921.
Cottage cheese is attested from 1831, American English, earliest in reference to Philadelphia:
There was a plate of rye-bread, and a plate of wheat, and a basket of crackers; another plate with
half a dozen paltry cakes that looked as if they had been bought under the old Court House; some
morsels of dried beef on two little tea-cup plates: and a small glass dish of that preparation of
curds, which in vulgar language is called smear-case, but whose nom de guerre is cottage-cheese, at
least that was the appellation given it by our hostess. [Miss Leslie, Country Lodgings, Godey's
Lady's Book, July 1831]


