smelt (n.)

Old English smelt sardine, small salmon-like sea fish, cognate with Dutch smelt sand eel, Danish
smelt (c.1600). OED notes that it has a peculiar odor (but doesn't suggest a connection with smell);
Klein suggests a connection with the way the fish melts in one's mouth. Century Dictionary
speculates it means smooth and compares Old English smeolt, smylt serene, smooth.


smelt (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in smelter), from Dutch or Low German smelten, from Proto-Germanic *smelt-
(cognates: Old High German smelzan, German schmelzen to melt), from PIE *smeld-, variant of *mel-
soft. Thus the word is from a variant of the stem of Old English meltan to melt (see melt (v.)).
Related: Smelted; smelting.


smelter (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from smelt (v.).


enamel (v.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French enamailler (early 14c.), from en- in (see en- (1)) + amailler to
enamel, variant of Old French esmailler, from esmal enamel, from Frankish *smalt, from Proto-
Germanic *smaltjan to smelt (see smelt (v.)). Related: Enameled; enameling.


schmaltz (n.)

banal or excessive sentimentalism, 1935, from Yiddish shmalts, literally melted fat, from Middle
High German smalz, from Old High German smalz animal fat, related to smelzan to melt (see smelt
(v.)). Modern German Schmalz fat, grease has the same figurative meaning. First mentioned in English
as a derogatory term used to describe straight jazz [Vanity Fair, Nov. 1935].


smell (v.)

late 12c., emit or perceive an odor, not found in Old English, perhaps cognate with Middle Dutch
smolen, Low German smelen to smolder (see smolder). However, OED says no doubt of Old English
origin, but not recorded, and not represented in any of the cognate languages. Related: Smelled or
smelt; smelling.   Smelling salts (1840), used to revive the woozy, typically were a scented
preparation of carbonate of ammonia. Smell-feast (n.) one who finds and frequents good tables, one
who scents out where free food is to be had is from 1510s (very common c.1540-1700, OED). Smell-
smock licentious man was in use c.1550-c.1900. To smell a rat be suspicious is from 1540s.


powder (n.)

c.1300, ash, cinders; dust of the earth; early 14c., pulverized substance; mid-14c., medicinal
powder; late 14c. as gunpowder, from Old French poudre dust, powder; ashes; powdered substance
(13c.), earlier pouldre (11c.), from Latin pulverem (nominative pulvis) dust (see pollen).
Specialized sense gunpowder is from late 14c. In the sense powdered cosmetic, it is recorded from
1570s.    In figurative sense, powder keg is first attested 1855. Powder room, euphemistic for
women's lavatory, is attested from 1936. Earlier it meant place where gunpowder is stored on a
warship (1620s). Powder horn attested by 1530s. Powder puff first recorded 1704; as a symbol of
femaleness or effeminacy, in use from at least 1930s.    Phrase take a powder scram, vanish, is from
1920; it was a common phrase as a doctor's instruction, so perhaps from the notion of taking a
laxative medicine or a sleeping powder, with the result that one has to leave in a hurry (or, on
another guess, from a magician's magical powder, which made things disappear). Powder blue (1650s)
was smelt used in laundering; as a color name from 1894.


silver (n.)

Old English seolfor, Mercian sylfur silver; money, from Proto-Germanic *silubra- (cognates: Old
Saxon silvbar, Old Frisian selover, Old Norse silfr, Middle Dutch silver, Dutch zilver, Old High
German silabar, German silber silver; money, Gothic silubr silver), from a common Germanic/Balto-
Slavic term (cognates: Old Church Slavonic s(u)rebo, Russian serebro, Polish srebro, Lithuanian
sidabras silver) of uncertain relationship and origin. According to Klein's sources, possibly from a
language of Asia Minor, perhaps from Akkadian sarpu silver, literally refined silver, related to
sarapu to refine, smelt.    As an adjective from late Old English (cognates: silvern). As a color
name from late 15c. Of voices, words, etc., from 1520s in reference to the metal's pleasing
resonance; silver-tongued is from 1590s. The silver age (1560s) was a phrase used by Greek and Roman
poets. Chemical abbreviation Ag is from Latin argentum silver, from the usual PIE word for the metal
(see argent), which is missing in Germanic.


