smirk (n.)

1550s, from smirk (v.).


smirk (v.)

Old English smearcian to smile. No exact cognates in other languages, but probably related to
smerian to laugh at, scorn, from Proto-Germanic *smer-, *smar-, variant of PIE *smei- to smile; see
smile (v.), which after c.1500 gradually restricted smirk to the unpleasant sense smile affectedly;
grin in a malicious or smug way. In some 18c. glossaries smirk is still simply to smile. Related:
Smirked; smirking. The noun is recorded by 1560s.


smile (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Low German *smilen or a Scandinavian source (such as Danish smile smile,
Swedish smila smile, smirk, simper, fawn), from Proto-Germanic *smil-, extended form of PIE root
*smei- to laugh, smile (cognates: Old English smerian to laugh at, scorn, Old High German smieron to
smile, Latin mirus wonderful, mirari to wonder). Related: Smiled; smiling.     Gradually pushed the
usual Old English word, smearcian (modern smirk), into a specific, unpleasant sense. Of the eyes,
from 1759. Figuratively, as indicating favor or encouragement, from c.1400. Romance, Celtic, and
Slavic languages tend to use a diminutive of the word for laugh to mean smile (such as Latin ridere
laugh; subridere smile), perhaps literally small laugh or low laugh.


talk (v.)

c.1200, talken, probably a diminutive or frequentative form related to Middle English tale story,
and ultimately from the same source as tale, with rare English formative -k (compare hark from hear,
stalk from steal, smirk from smile) and replacing that word as a verb. East Frisian has talken to
talk, chatter, whisper. Related: Talked; talking.    To talk (something) up discuss in order to
promote is from 1722. To talk shop is from 1854. To talk turkey is from 1824, supposedly from an
elaborate joke about a swindled Indian. To talk back answer impudently or rudely is from 1869.
Phrase talking head is by 1966 in the jargon of television production, an in-tight closeup of a
human head talking on television. In reference to a person who habitually appears on television in
talking-head shots (usually a news anchor), by 1970. The phrase is used earlier, in reference to the
well-known magic trick (such as Se&#241;or Wences's talking head-in-the-box Pedro on the Ed Sullivan
Show), and to actual talking heads in mythology around the world (Orpheus, Bran).


