smolder (v.)

c.1300 (implied in smoldering), to smother, suffocate, related to Middle Dutch smolen, Low German
smelen, Flemish smoel hot, from Proto-Germanic *smel-, *smul-. The intransitive meaning burn and
smoke without flame is first recorded 1520s, fell from use 17c. (though smoldering persisted in
poetry) and was revived 19c. Figurative sense exist in a suppressed state; burn inwardly is from
1810. Related: Smouldered; smolderingly. Middle English also had a noun smolder meaning smoky vapor,
a stifling smoke.


smell (v.)

late 12c., emit or perceive an odor, not found in Old English, perhaps cognate with Middle Dutch
smolen, Low German smelen to smolder (see smolder). However, OED says no doubt of Old English
origin, but not recorded, and not represented in any of the cognate languages. Related: Smelled or
smelt; smelling.   Smelling salts (1840), used to revive the woozy, typically were a scented
preparation of carbonate of ammonia. Smell-feast (n.) one who finds and frequents good tables, one
who scents out where free food is to be had is from 1510s (very common c.1540-1700, OED). Smell-
smock licentious man was in use c.1550-c.1900. To smell a rat be suspicious is from 1540s.


smoulder (v.)

see smolder. Related: Smouldered; smouldering; smoulderingly.


smother (v.)

c.1200, to suffocate with smoke, from smother (n.), earlier smorthre dense, suffocating smoke (late
12c.), from stem of Old English smorian to suffocate, choke, strangle, stifle, cognate with Middle
Dutch smoren, German schmoren; possibly connected to smolder. Meaning to kill by suffocation in any
manner is from 1540s; sense of to extinguish a fire is from 1590s. Sense of stifle, repress is first
recorded 1570s; meaning to cover thickly (with some substance) is from 1590s. Related: Smothered;
smothering.


Selene

moon goddess, equivalent of Latin Luna, from Greek selene the moon; name of the moon goddess,
related to selas light, brightness, bright flame, flash of an eye, from PIE root *swel- (2) to
shine, beam (cognates: Sanskrit svargah heaven, Lithuanian svilti to singe, Old English swelan to be
burnt up, Middle Low German swelan to smolder); related to swelter, sultry. Related: Selenian of or
pertaining to the moon as a world, 1660s.


