smother (v.)

c.1200, to suffocate with smoke, from smother (n.), earlier smorthre dense, suffocating smoke (late
12c.), from stem of Old English smorian to suffocate, choke, strangle, stifle, cognate with Middle
Dutch smoren, German schmoren; possibly connected to smolder. Meaning to kill by suffocation in any
manner is from 1540s; sense of to extinguish a fire is from 1590s. Sense of stifle, repress is first
recorded 1570s; meaning to cover thickly (with some substance) is from 1590s. Related: Smothered;
smothering.


suffocate (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), deprive of air, choke, kill by preventing access of air to the lungs, also
figurative, stifle, smother, extinguish, from Latin suffocatus, past participle of suffocare to
choke (see suffocation). Intransitive use, become choked, stifled, or smothered, is from 1702.
Related: Suffocated; suffocating.


stifle (v.)

late 14c., to choke, suffocate, drown, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Old French
estouffer to stifle, smother (Modern French &#233;touffer), itself of uncertain origin, perhaps from
a Germanic source (compare Old High German stopfon to plug up, stuff). Metaphoric sense is from
1570s. Related: Stifled; stifling.


smolder (v.)

c.1300 (implied in smoldering), to smother, suffocate, related to Middle Dutch smolen, Low German
smelen, Flemish smoel hot, from Proto-Germanic *smel-, *smul-. The intransitive meaning burn and
smoke without flame is first recorded 1520s, fell from use 17c. (though smoldering persisted in
poetry) and was revived 19c. Figurative sense exist in a suppressed state; burn inwardly is from
1810. Related: Smouldered; smolderingly. Middle English also had a noun smolder meaning smoky vapor,
a stifling smoke.


oppress (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French opresser oppress, afflict; torment, smother (13c.), from Medieval Latin
oppressare, frequentative of Latin opprimere press against, press together, press down; figuratively
crush, put down, subdue, prosecute relentlessly (in Late Latin to rape), from ob against (see ob-) +
premere to press, push (see press (v.1)).    It is the due [external] restraint and not the
moderation of rulers that constitutes a state of liberty; as the power to oppress, though never
exercised, does a state of slavery. [St. George Tucker, View of the Constitution of the United
States, 1803]    Related: Oppressed; oppressing.


wet (adj.)

Old English w&aelig;t moist, rainy, liquid, also as a noun. moisture, liquid drink, from Proto-
Germanic *weta- (source also of Old Frisian wet ). Also from cognate Old Norse vatr; all from PIE
*wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). Of paint, ink, etc., not yet dry from 1510s. Opposed to dry
in reference to the U.S. battles over prohibition from 1870. Wet blanket person who has a
dispiriting effect is recorded from 1871, from use of blankets drenched in water to smother fires
(the phrase is attested in this literal sense from 1660s).    Do we not know them, those wet
blankets who come down on our pleasant little fires and extinguish them, with no more ruth than the
rain feels when it pours on the encampment of the merry picnic party, or floods the tents of a
flower show? [Wet Blankets, in Godey's Lady's Book and Magazine, February, 1871]   All wet in the
wrong is recorded from 1923, American English; earlier simply wet ineffectual, and perhaps
ultimately from slang meaning drunken (c.1700). Wet-nurse is from 1610s. The diver's wet-suit is
from 1955. Wet dream is from 1851; in the same sense Middle English had ludificacioun an erotic
dream.    He knew som tyme a man of religion, &thorn;at gaff hym gretelie vnto chastitie bothe of
his harte &amp; of his body noghtwithstondyng he was tempid with grete ludificacions on &thorn;e
nyght. [Alphabet of Tales, c.1450]


