smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


stuffy (adj.)

1550s, full of stuff, full of substance (obsolete); 1831 as poorly ventilated; from stuff (n.) + -y
(2). Sense of pompous, smug is from 1895. Related: Stuffily; stuffiness.


smirk (v.)

Old English smearcian to smile. No exact cognates in other languages, but probably related to
smerian to laugh at, scorn, from Proto-Germanic *smer-, *smar-, variant of PIE *smei- to smile; see
smile (v.), which after c.1500 gradually restricted smirk to the unpleasant sense smile affectedly;
grin in a malicious or smug way. In some 18c. glossaries smirk is still simply to smile. Related:
Smirked; smirking. The noun is recorded by 1560s.


prohibition (n.)

late 14c., act of prohibiting, a forbidding by authority, from Anglo-French and Old French
prohibition (early 13c.), from Latin prohibitionem (nominative prohibitio) a hindering, forbidding;
legal prohibition, noun of action from past participle stem of prohibere hold back, restrain,
hinder, prevent, from pro- away, forth (see pro-) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Meaning forced
alcohol abstinence is 1851, American English; in effect nationwide in U.S. as law 1920-1933 under
the Volstead Act.    People whose youth did not coincide with the twenties never had our reverence
for strong drink. Older men knew liquor before it became the symbol of a sacred cause. Kids who
began drinking after 1933 take it as a matter of course. ... Drinking, we proved to ourselves our
freedom as individuals and flouted Congress. We conformed to a popular type of dissent -- dissent
from a minority. It was the only period during which a fellow could be smug and slopped
concurrently. [A.J. Liebling, Between Meals, 1959]    Related: Prohibitionist.


