sneak (n.)

a sneaking person; mean, contemptible fellow, 1640s, from sneak (v.).


sneak (v.)

1550s (implied in sneakish), perhaps from some dialectal survival of Middle English sniken to creep,
crawl (c.1200), related to Old English snican to sneak along, creep, crawl, from Proto-Germanic
*sneikanan, which is related to the root of snake (n.). Of feelings, suspicions, etc., from 1748.
Transitive sense, to partake of surreptitiously is from 1883. Related: Sneaking. Sneak-thief first
recorded 1859; sneak-preview is from 1938.


sneaker (n.)

1590s, one who sneaks, agent noun from sneak (v.). Meaning rubber-soled shoe is attested from 1895,
American English; earlier sneak (1862), so called because the shoe was noiseless. See also plimsoll;
another early name for them was tackies (1902), from tacky (adj.1).  The night-officer is generally
accustomed to wear a species of India-rubber shoes or goloshes on her feet. These are termed
'sneaks' by the women [of Brixton Prison]. [Female Life in Prison, 1862]    Related: Sneakers.


sneaky (adj.)

1833, from sneak (v.) + -y (2). Related: Sneakily; sneakiness. Sneaky Pete cheap liquor is from
1949.


Jap

Colloquial abbreviation of Japanese, by 1880 as a noun, 1892 as an adjective, not originally
pejorative but became so during World War II. It was protested by Japanese before the war, but did
not begin to be taboo in the U.S. before 1960s. For some years after World War II in American
English the word also functioned as a verb, to execute a sneak attack upon, a reference to Pearl
Harbor.


sniggler (n.)

1840, in reference to fishing (especially for eels), agent noun from sniggle (v.) attested in this
sense from 1670s, with verbal suffix -le + snig an eel (late 15c.), of obscure origin, but perhaps
related to snake (n.), sneak (v.).


cop out

by 1942, noun and verb, sneak off, escape, American English slang, probably from cop a plea (c.1925)
plead guilty to lesser charges, probably from northern British slang cop to catch (a scolding,
etc.); as in cop a feel grope someone (1930s); see cop (v.). Sense of evade an issue or problem is
from 1960s.


creep (n.)

a creeping motion, 1818, from creep (v.). Meaning despicable person is 1935, American English slang,
perhaps from earlier sense of sneak thief (1914). Creeper a gilded rascal is recorded from c.1600,
and the word also was used of certain classes of thieves, especially those who robbed customers in
brothels. The creeps a feeling of dread or revulsion first attested 1849, in Dickens.


snoop (v.)

1832, to go around in a prying manner, American English, probably from Dutch snoepen to pry, also
eat in secret, eat sweets, sneak, probably related to snappen to bite, snatch (see snap (v.)).
Specific meaning to pry into other people's business is attested from 1921. Related: Snooped;
snooping.


jerry-built (adj.)

1869, in which jerry has a sense of bad, defective, probably a pejorative use of the male nickname
Jerry (a popular form of Jeremy; compare Jerry-sneak, mid-19c., sneaking fellow, a hen-pecked
husband [OED]). Or from or influenced by nautical slang jury temporary, which came to be used of all
sorts of makeshift and inferior objects (see jury (adj.)).


lurk (v.)

c.1300, lurken to hide, lie hidden, probably from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Norwegian lurka to
sneak away, dialectal Swedish lurka to be slow in one's work), perhaps ultimately related to Middle
English luren to frown, lurk (see lower (v.2)). Related: Lurked; lurking.


copperhead (n.)

Trigonocephalus contortrix, 1775, American English, so called for color markings between its eyes;
see copper + head (n.). Poisonous sneak snakes (because they bite without warning), the name is said
to have been first used in reference to Northerners suspected of Southern sympathies in Greeley's
New York Tribune, July 20, 1861. Charles H. Coleman, The Use of the Term 'Copperhead' During the
Civil War [Mississippi Valley Historical Review 25 (1938), p.263] traces it to an anonymous letter
against Ohio anti-war Democrats in the Cincinnati Commercial newspaper in the summer of 1861. It
seems not to have been in widespread use until summer 1862.


slick (v.)

Old English -slician (in nigslicod newly made sleek), from Proto-Germanic *slikojan, from base
*slikaz (cognates: Old Norse slikr smooth, Old High German slihhan to glide, German schleichen to
creep, crawl, sneak, Dutch slijk mud, mire), from PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from root
*(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). Related: Slicked; slicking.


smuggler (n.)

1660s, from Low German smuggeln or Dutch smokkelen to transport (goods) illegally, apparently a
frequentative formation of a word meaning to sneak (from Proto-Germanic *smuganan; cognates: Dutch
smuigen to eat secretly; Swedish smyg a lurking-hole, Danish smughandel contraband trade, Norwegian
smjuga, Old English smeogan to creep), perhaps literally to slip (contraband through), from Proto-
Germanic *(s)muk- (see smock).


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


