sober (v.)

late 14c., reduce to a quiet condition (transitive), from sober (adj.). Meaning render grave or
serious is from 1726. Intransitive sense of become sober (since 1847 often with up) is from 1820.
Related: Sobered; sobering.


sober (adj.)

mid-14c., moderate in desires or actions, temperate, restrained, especially abstaining from strong
drink, also calm, quiet, not overcome by emotion, from Old French sobre decent; sober (12c.), from
Latin sobrius not drunk, temperate, moderate, sensible, from a variant of se- without (see se-) +
ebrius drunk, of unknown origin. Meaning not drunk at the moment is from late 14c.; also
appropriately solemn, serious, not giddy. Related: Soberly; soberness. Sobersides sedate, serious-
minded person is recorded from 1705.


soberly (adv.)

mid-14c., temperately; late 14c., gravely, from sober (adj.) + -ly (2).


staid (adj.)

1540s, fixed, permanent, adjectival use of stayed, past participle of stay (v.). Meaning sober,
sedate first recorded 1550s. Related: Staidly.


abstemious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin abstemius sober, temperate, from ab(s)- from (see ab-) + stem of temetum strong
drink, related to temulentus drunken. Technically, of liquor, but extended in Latin to temperance in
living generally. Related: Abstemiously; abstemiousness.


sobriety (n.)

c.1400, moderation in indulgence, from Old French sobriete sobriety, moderation (Modern French
sobriet&eacute;) or directly from Latin sobrietatem (nominative sobrietas), from sobrius (see sober
(adj.)). Meaning steadiness, gravity is recorded from 1540s.


temperate (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, modest, forbearing, self-restrained, not swayed by passion; of climates or
seasons, not liable to excessive heat or cold, from Latin temperatus restrained, regulated, limited,
moderate, sober, calm, steady, from past participle of temperare to moderate, regulate (see temper
(v.)). Related: Temperately; temperateness. Temperate zone is attested from 1550s.


stone (adj.)

made of stone, Old English (which also had st&#230;nan stonen); see stone (n.). As an intensifying
adjective recorded from 1935, first recorded in black slang, probably from earlier use in phrases
like stone blind (late 14c., literally blind as a stone), stone deaf, stone-cold (1590s), etc. Stone
cold sober dates from 1937.


modesty (n.)

1530s, freedom from exaggeration, self-control, from Middle French modestie or directly from Latin
modestia moderation, sense of honor, correctness of conduct, from modestus moderate, keeping
measure, sober, gentle, temperate, from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning quality of
having a moderate opinion of oneself is from 1550s; that of womanly propriety is from 1560s.   La
pudeur donne des plaisirs bien flatteurs &#224; l'amant: elle lui fait sentir quelles lois l'on
transgresse pour lui;  (Modesty both pleases and flatters a lover, for it lays stress on the laws
which are being transgressed for his sake.) [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


