sociology (n.)

the science of social phenomena, 1842, from French sociologie, a hybrid coined 1830 by French
philosopher Isidore Auguste Comte (1798-1857), from Latin socius associate (see social (adj.)) +
Greek-derived suffix -logie (see -logy).


matrifocal (adj.)

1952, a term from sociology, from matri- + focal.


socio-

word-forming element meaning social, of society; social and, also having to do with sociology, from
combining form of Latin socius companion, ally, associate, fellow, sharer (see social (adj.)).
Common in compounds since c.1880.


sensate (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin sensatus gifted with sense, from sensus (see sense (n.)). From 1937 in
sociology. As a verb from 1650s.


mum (n.2)

pet word for mother, 1823, short for mummy (see mamma). In British sociology, used from 1957 in
reference to the working class mother as an influence in the lives of her children. Also sometimes a
vulgar corruption of madam.


sociological (adj.)

1861; see sociology + -ical. Related: Sociologically.


sociologist (n.)

1843, from sociology + -ist.


mobility (n.)

early 15c., capacity for motion, from Old French mobilit&eacute; changeableness, inconsistency,
fickleness, from Latin mobilitatem (nominative mobilitas) activity, speed, figuratively
changeableness, fickleness, inconstancy, from mobilis (see mobile (adj.)). Socio-economics sense is
from 1900 and writers in sociology.


stratification (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin stratificationem (nominative stratificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of stratificare to form strata, from stratum thing spread out  (see stratum) + root
of facere to make (see factitious). In sociology from 1879.


mobile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis movable, easy to move; loose, not
firm, figuratively, pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle,
contraction of *movibilis, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Sociology sense from 1927. Mobile
home first recorded 1940.


mass (n.1)

lump, quantity, size, late 14c., from Old French masse lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot,
bar (11c.), and directly from Latin massa kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like
dough, probably from Greek maza barley cake, lump, mass, ball, related to massein to knead, from PIE
root *mag- to knead (source of Lithuanian minkyti to knead, see macerate). Sense extended in English
1580s to a large quantity, amount, or number. Strict sense in physics is from 1704.    As an
adjective from 1733, first attested in mass meeting in American English. mass culture is from 1916
in sociology (earlier in biology); mass hysteria is from 1914; mass media is from 1923; mass
movement is from 1897; mass production is from 1920; mass grave is from 1918; mass murder from 1880.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


