sodden (adj.)

soaked or softened in water, 1820, earlier resembling something that has been boiled a long time
(1590s), originally boiled (c.1300), from Old English soden boiled, strong past participle of
seo&thorn;an to cook, boil (see seethe). For sense evolution from heat in water to immerse in water
compare bath.


gaol

see jail, you tea-sodden football hooligan.


sappy (adj.)

full of sap, Late Old English s&aelig;pig, from s&aelig;p (see sap (n.1)). Figurative sense of
foolishly sentimental (1660s) may have developed from an intermediate sense of wet, sodden (late
15c.). Earlier, now obsolete, figurative senses were full of vitality (1550s) and immature (1620s).


mat (adj.)

1640s, lusterless, dull (of a color or surface), from French mat dull, dead surface, from Old French
mat beaten down, withered, afflicted, dejected; dull, which is perhaps from Latin mattus maudlin
with drink, from madere to be wet or sodden, be drunk, from PIE root *mad- to be wet, drip (see mast
(n.2)). Or the French word might represent a transferred use from chess of mater to checkmate,
defeat, from Arabic (see mate (v.2)).


mast (n.2)

fallen nuts; food for swine, Old English m&aelig;st, from Proto-Germanic *masto (cognates: Dutch,
Old High German, German mast mast; Old English verb m&aelig;sten to fatten, feed), perhaps from PIE
*mad-sta-, from root *mad- moist, wet, also used of various qualities of food (cognates: Sanskrit
madati it bubbles, gladdens, medah fat, marrow; Latin madere be sodden, be drunk; Middle Persian
mast drunk; Old English mete food, Old High German muos meal, mushlike food, Gothic mats food).


seethe (v.)

Old English seo&thorn;an to boil, also figuratively, be troubled in mind, brood (class II strong
verb; past tense sea&thorn;, past participle soden), from Proto-Germanic *seuthan (cognates: Old
Norse sjo&eth;a, Old Frisian siatha, Dutch zieden, Old High German siodan, German sieden to seethe),
from PIE root *seut- to seethe, boil.    Driven out of its literal meaning by boil (v.); it survives
largely in metaphoric extensions. Figurative use, of persons or populations, to be in a state of
inward agitation is recorded from 1580s (implied in seething). It had wider figurative uses in Old
English, such as to try by fire, to afflict with cares. Now conjugated as a weak verb, and past
participle sodden (q.v.) is no longer felt as connected.


