solace (v.)

comfort, console in grief, late 13c.; also in Middle English entertain, amuse, please, from Old
French solacier comfort, console (often with a sexual connotation) and directly from Medieval Latin
solatiare give solace, console (source also of Spanish solazar, Italian sollazzare), from Latin
solacium (see solace (n.)). Related: Solaced; solacing.


solace (n.)

comfort in grief, consolation, late 13c., from Old French solaz pleasure, entertainment, enjoyment;
solace, comfort, from Latin solacium a soothing, assuaging; comfort, consolation, from solatus, past
participle of solari to console, soothe, from PIE *sol-a-, suffixed form of root *sele- of good
mood; to favor (cognates: Old English ges&aelig;lig happy; see silly). Adjectival form solacious is
attested 16c.-17c.


console (v.)

1690s, from French consoler to comfort, console, from Latin consolari offer solace, encourage,
comfort, cheer, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + solari to comfort (see solace). Or perhaps
a back-formation from consolation. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by frefran. Related:
Consoled; consoling.


sport (n.)

early 15c., pleasant pastime, shortening of disport activity that offers amusement or relaxation;
entertainment, fun (c.1300), also a pastime or game; flirtation; pleasure taken in such activity
(late 14c.), from Anglo-French disport, Old French desport, deport pleasure, enjoyment, delight;
solace, consolation; favor, privilege, related to desporter, deporter to divert, amuse, please, play
(see sport (v.)).    Original sense preserved in phrases such as in sport in jest (mid-15c.).
Meaning game involving physical exercise first recorded 1520s. Sense of stylish man is from 1861,
American English, probably because they lived by gambling and betting on races. Meaning good fellow
is attested from 1881 (as in be a sport, 1913). Sport as a familiar form of address to a man is from
1935, Australian English. The sport of kings was originally (1660s) war-making. Other, lost senses
of Middle English disport were consolation, solace; a source of comfort.


consolation (n.)

late 14c., act of consoling, from Old French consolacion (11c., Modern French consolation) solace,
comfort; delight, pleasure, from Latin consolationem (nominative consolatio-) consoling, comforting,
noun of action from consolat-, past participle stem of consolari (see console (v.)). Consolation
prize is recorded from 1886.


comfort (v.)

late 13c., conforten to cheer up, console, from Old French conforter to comfort, to solace; to help,
strengthen, from Late Latin confortare to strengthen much (used in Vulgate), from Latin com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + fortis strong (see fort). Change of -n- to -m- began in English 14c.
Related: Comforted; comforting.


