vow (n.)

solemn promise, c.1300, from Anglo-French and Old French voe (Modern French v&#339;u), from Latin
votum a promise to a god, solemn pledge, dedication; that which is promised; a wish, desire,
longing, prayer, noun use of neuter of votus, past participle of vovere to promise solemnly, pledge,
dedicate, vow, from PIE root *wegwh- to speak solemnly, vow, preach (cognates: Sanskrit vaghat- one
who offers a sacrifice; Greek eukhe vow, wish, eukhomai I pray). Meaning solemn engagement to devote
oneself to a religious order or life is from c.1400; earlier to bind oneself to chastity (early
14c.).


gravely (adv.)

1550s, solemnly, from grave (adj.) + -ly (2).


sponsor (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin sponsor sponsor in baptism, in Latin a surety, guarantee, bondsman, from
sponsus, past participle of spondere give assurance, promise solemnly (see spondee). Sense of person
who pays for a radio (or, after 1947, TV) program is first recorded 1931.


vow (v.)

promise solemnly, c.1300, from Old French voer, from voe (see vow (n.)). Related: Vowed; vowing.


pledge (v.)

c.1400, to promise (something to someone), to give over as security for repayment, also promise
faith to, from pledge (n.) and from Old French plegier, from plege (n.). From mid-15c. as to stand
surety for, be responsible for; late 15c. as to mortgage. Meaning put (someone) under oath is from
1570s; sense of to solemnly promise or guarantee is from 1590s, as is sense to drink a toast.
Related: Pledged; pledging.


protest (v.)

mid-15c., to declare or state formally or solemnly, from Old French protester, from Latin protestari
declare publicly, testify, protest (see protest (n.)). Original sense preserved in to protest one's
innocence. Related: Protested; protesting.


devotion (n.)

early 13c., from Old French devocion devotion, piety, from Latin devotionem (nominative devotio),
noun of action from past participle stem of devovere dedicate by a vow, sacrifice oneself, promise
solemnly, from de- down, away (see de-) + vovere to vow, from votum vow (see vow (n.)).    In
ancient Latin, act of consecrating by a vow, also loyalty, fealty, allegiance; in Church Latin,
devotion to God, piety. This was the original sense in English; the etymological sense, including
secular situations, returned 16c. via Italian and French.


disk (n.)

American English preferred spelling, 1660s, round flat surface, from Latin discus quoit, discus,
disk, from Greek diskos disk, quoit, platter, related to dikein throw, from PIE *dik-skos-, from
root *deik- to show, pronounce solemnly; also in derivatives referring to the directing of words or
objects [Watkins]; see diction.    Sense of phonograph disk is 1888; computing sense is from 1947.
Disk jockey first recorded 1941; dee-jay is from 1955; DJ is 1961; video version veejay is 1982.
Disk-drive is from 1952.


calendar (n.)

c.1200, system of division of the year; mid-14c. as table showing divisions of the year; from Old
French calendier list, register, from Latin calendarium account book, from calendae/kalendae calends
the first day of the Roman month -- when debts fell due and accounts were reckoned -- from calare to
announce solemnly, call out, as the priests did in proclaiming the new moon that marked the calends,
from PIE root kele- (2) to call, shout (see claim (v.)).    Taken by the early Church for its
register list of saints and their feast days. The -ar spelling in English is 17c. to differentiate
it from the now obscure calender cloth-presser.


spouse (n.)

c.1200, a married person, either one of a married pair, but especially a married woman in relation
to her husband, also Christ or God as the spiritual husband of the soul, the church, etc., also
marriage, the wedded state, from Old French spous (fem. spouse) marriage partner, variant of
espous/espouse (Modern French &#233;pous/&#233;pouse), from Latin sponsus bridegroom (fem. sponsa
bride), literally betrothed, from masc. and fem. past participle of spondere to bind oneself,
promise solemnly, from PIE *spend- to make an offering, perform a rite (see spondee). Spouse-breach
(early 13c.) was an old name for adultery.


avouch (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French avochier call upon as authority, in Old French call (to court),
advocate, plead (a case), from Latin advocare call to as a witness (see advocate).   Avouch, which
is no longer in common use, means guarantee, solemnly aver, prove by assertion, maintain the truth
or existence of, vouch for .... Avow means own publicly to, make no secret of, not shrink from
admitting, acknowledge one's responsibility for .... Vouch is now common only in the phrase vouch
for, which has taken the place of avouch in ordinary use, &amp; means pledge one's word for ....
[Fowler]    Related: Avouched; avouching.


solemn (adj.)

mid-14c., performed with due religious ceremony or reverence, sacred, devoted to religious
observances, also, of a vow, etc., made under religious sanction, binding, from Old French solempne
(12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin sollemnis annual, established, religiously
fixed, formal, ceremonial, traditional, perhaps related to sollus whole (see safe (adj.)).    The
explanation that Latin sollemnis was formed from sollus whole + annus year is not considered valid
[Barnhart], but some assimilation via folk-etymology is possible. In Middle English also famous,
important; imposing, grand, hence Chaucer's friar, a ful solempne man. Meaning marked by seriousness
or earnestness is from late 14c.; sense of fitted to inspire devout reflection is from c.1400.
Related: Solemnly.


censor (n.)

1530s, Roman magistrate who took censuses and oversaw public morals, from Middle French censor and
directly from Latin censor, from censere to appraise, value, judge, from PIE root *kens- speak
solemnly, announce (cognates: Sanskrit &#347;amsati recites, praises, &#347;asa song of praise).
There were two of them at a time in classical times, usually patricians, and they also had charge of
public finances and public works. Transferred sense of officious judge of morals and conduct in
English is from 1590s. Roman censor also had a transferred sense of a severe judge; a rigid
moralist; a censurer. Of books, plays (later films, etc.), 1640s. By the early decades of the 19c.
the meaning of the English word had shaded into state agent charged with suppression of speech or
published matter deemed politically subversive. Related: Censorial.


claim (v.)

c.1300, to call, call out; to ask or demand by virtue of right or authority, from accented stem of
Old French clamer to call, name, describe; claim; complain; declare, from Latin clamare to cry out,
shout, proclaim, from PIE *kele- (2) to shout, imitative (compare Sanskrit usakala cock, literally
dawn-calling; Latin calare to announce solemnly, call out; Middle Irish cailech cock; Greek kalein
to call, kelados noise, kledon report, fame; Old High German halan to call; Old English hlowan to
low, make a noise like a cow; Lithuanian kalba language). Related: Claimed; claiming.    Meaning to
maintain as true is from 1864; specific sense to make a claim (on an insurance company) is from
1897. Claim properly should not stray too far from its true meaning of to demand recognition of a
right.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


