solemnize (v.)

late 14c., honor by ceremonies, from Old French solemnisier, from Medieval Latin solemnizare, from
Latin solemnis (see solemn). Meaning render solemn is from 1726. Related: Solemnized; solemnizing.


solemnity (n.)

c.1300, observance of ceremony, from Old French solemnite, solempnete celebration, high festival,
church ceremony and directly from Latin solemnitatem (nominative solemnitas) a solemnity, from
sollemnis (see solemn). Meaning state of being solemn is from 1712. Related: Solemnities.


solemnization (n.)

mid-15c., act of celebrating, from Old French solemnisation, solempnisation, or directly from
Medieval Latin solempnizationem (nominative solempnizatio), from Latin sollemnis (see solemn).


solemn (adj.)

mid-14c., performed with due religious ceremony or reverence, sacred, devoted to religious
observances, also, of a vow, etc., made under religious sanction, binding, from Old French solempne
(12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin sollemnis annual, established, religiously
fixed, formal, ceremonial, traditional, perhaps related to sollus whole (see safe (adj.)).    The
explanation that Latin sollemnis was formed from sollus whole + annus year is not considered valid
[Barnhart], but some assimilation via folk-etymology is possible. In Middle English also famous,
important; imposing, grand, hence Chaucer's friar, a ful solempne man. Meaning marked by seriousness
or earnestness is from late 14c.; sense of fitted to inspire devout reflection is from c.1400.
Related: Solemnly.


vow (n.)

solemn promise, c.1300, from Anglo-French and Old French voe (Modern French v&#339;u), from Latin
votum a promise to a god, solemn pledge, dedication; that which is promised; a wish, desire,
longing, prayer, noun use of neuter of votus, past participle of vovere to promise solemnly, pledge,
dedicate, vow, from PIE root *wegwh- to speak solemnly, vow, preach (cognates: Sanskrit vaghat- one
who offers a sacrifice; Greek eukhe vow, wish, eukhomai I pray). Meaning solemn engagement to devote
oneself to a religious order or life is from c.1400; earlier to bind oneself to chastity (early
14c.).


Festus

male proper name, from Latin, literally solemn, joyous, festive (see feast (n.)).


protester (n.)

also protestor, 1540s, one who makes solemn affirmation; agent noun from protest (v.). From 1960 as
demonstrator, public opponent of the established order.


cocksure (adj.)

1520s, certain, from cock (n.1) + sure (adj.). Probably as assured as a cock. The word was
originally perfectly dignified, and habitually used in the most solemn connexions [OED].


festival (n.)

1580s, from earlier adjective (14c.), from Old French festival suitable for a feast, solemn,
magnificent, joyful, happy, and directly from Medieval Latin festivalis of a church holiday (see
festivity).


vote (n.)

mid-15c., formal expression of one's wish or choice with regard to a proposal, candidate, etc., from
Latin votum a vow, wish, promise to a god, solemn pledge, dedication, noun use of neuter of votus,
past participle of vovere to promise, dedicate (see vow (n.)). Meaning totality of voters of a
certain class or type is from 1888.


covenant (v.)

c.1300, from covenant (n.). Related: Covenanted; covenanting. Covenanter (1638) was used especially
in reference to Scottish Presbyterians who signed the Solemn League and Covenant (1643) for the
defense and furtherance of their cause.


Exodus

late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus, from Greek exodos a
military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death, literally a going out, from ex- out (see
ex-) + hodos way (see cede). General sense (with lower-case -e-) is from 1620s.


confarreation (n.)

c.1600, from Latin confarreationem, from confarreare to unite in marriage by the Ceremony of the
Cake, from com- with, together (see com-) + far, farris spelt, grain, meal (see barley). In ancient
Rome, the most solemn form of marriage, in which an offering of bread was made in the presence of
the Pontifex Maximus and 10 witnesses.


assurance (n.)

late 14c., formal or solemn pledge, promise, also certainty, from Old French asseurance (11c.,
Modern French assurance) assurance, promise; truce; certainty, safety, security, from asseurer (see
assure). The word had a negative tinge 18c., often suggesting impudence or presumption.


brief (n.)

from Latin breve (genitive brevis), noun derivative of adjective brevis (see brief (adj.)) which
came to mean letter, summary, specifically a letter of the pope (less ample and solemn than a bull),
and thus came to mean letter of authority, which yielded the modern, legal sense of summary of the
facts of a case (1630s).


celebrate (v.)

mid-15c., originally of the Mass, from Latin celebratus much-frequented; kept solemn; famous, past
participle of celebrare assemble to honor, also to publish; sing praises of; practice often,
originally to frequent in great numbers, from celeber frequented, populous, crowded; with
transferred senses of well-attended; famous; often-repeated. Related: Celebrated; celebrating.


fair (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French feyre (late 13c.), from Old French feire, from Vulgar Latin *feria
holiday, market fair, from Latin feriae religious festivals, holidays, related to festus solemn,
festive, joyous (see feast).


pomp (n.)

c.1300, from Old French pompe pomp, magnificence (13c.) and directly from Latin pompa procession,
pomp, from Greek pompe solemn procession, display, literally a sending, from pempein to send. In
Church Latin, used in deprecatory sense for worldly display, vain show.


celebrity (n.)

late 14c., solemn rite or ceremony, from Old French celebrit&eacute; celebration or directly from
Latin celibritatem (nominative celebritas) multitude, fame, from celeber frequented, populous (see
celebrate). Meaning condition of being famous is from c.1600; that of famous person is from 1849.
When the old gods withdraw, the empty thrones cry out for a successor, and with good management, or
even without management, almost any perishable bag of bones may be hoisted into the vacant seat.
[E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational]


profession (n.)

c.1200, vows taken upon entering a religious order, from Old French profession (12c.), from Latin
professionem (nominative professio) public declaration, from past participle stem of profiteri
declare openly (see profess). Meaning any solemn declaration is from mid-14c. Meaning occupation one
professes to be skilled in is from early 15c.; meaning body of persons engaged in some occupation is
from 1610; as a euphemism for prostitution (compare oldest profession) it is recorded from 1888.


sober (adj.)

mid-14c., moderate in desires or actions, temperate, restrained, especially abstaining from strong
drink, also calm, quiet, not overcome by emotion, from Old French sobre decent; sober (12c.), from
Latin sobrius not drunk, temperate, moderate, sensible, from a variant of se- without (see se-) +
ebrius drunk, of unknown origin. Meaning not drunk at the moment is from late 14c.; also
appropriately solemn, serious, not giddy. Related: Soberly; soberness. Sobersides sedate, serious-
minded person is recorded from 1705.


protest (n.)

c.1400, avowal, pledge, solemn declaration, from Old French protest (Modern French pr&#244;tet),
from preotester, and directly from Latin protestari declare publicly, testify, protest, from pro-
forth, before (see pro-) + testari testify, from testis witness (see testament).    Meaning
statement of disapproval first recorded 1751; adjectival sense of expressing of dissent from, or
rejection of, prevailing mores is from 1953, in reference to U.S. civil rights movement. First
record of protest march is from 1959.


oath (n.)

Old English a&eth; oath, judicial swearing, solemn appeal to deity in witness of truth or a promise,
from Proto-Germanic *aithaz (cognates: Old Norse ei&eth;r, Swedish ed, Old Saxon, Old Frisian eth,
Middle Dutch eet, Dutch eed, German eid, Gothic ai&thorn;s oath), from PIE *oi-to- an oath
(cognates: Old Irish oeth oath). Common to Celtic and Germanic, possibly a loan-word from one to the
other, but the history is obscure. In reference to careless invocations of divinity, from late 12c.


spondee (n.)

metrical foot consisting of two long syllables, late 14c., from Old French spondee (14c.), from
Latin spondeus, from Greek spondeios (pous), the name of the meter originally used in chants
accompanying libations, from sponde solemn libation, a drink-offering, related to spendein make a
drink offering, from PIE root *spend- to make an offering, perform a rite, hence to engage oneself
by a ritual act (cognates: Latin spondere to engage oneself, promise, Hittite shipantahhi I pour out
a libation, I sacrifice). Related: Spondaic.


warlock (n.)

Old English w&aelig;rloga traitor, liar, enemy, devil, from w&aelig;r faith, fidelity; a compact,
agreement, covenant, from Proto-Germanic *wera- (cognates: Old High German wara truth, Old Norse
varar solemn promise, vow), from PIE *were-o- true, trustworthy (see very, also Varangian). Second
element is an agent noun related to leogan to lie (see lie (v.1); and compare Old English wordloga
deceiver, liar).    Original primary sense seems to have been oath-breaker; given special
application to the devil (c.1000), but also used of giants and cannibals. Meaning one in league with
the devil is recorded from c.1300. Ending in -ck (1680s) and meaning male equivalent of a witch
(1560s) are from Scottish. Related: Warlockery.


pledge (n.)

mid-14c., surety, bail, from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) hostage, security, bail,
probably from Frankish *plegan to guarantee, from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning have
responsibility for (cognates: Old Saxon plegan vouch for, Middle Dutch plien to answer for,
guarantee, Old High German pflegan to care for, be accustomed to, Old English pleon to risk the loss
of, expose to danger; see plight (v.)).    Meaning allegiance vow attested by drinking with another
is from 1630s. Sense of solemn promise first recorded 1814, though this notion is from 16c. in the
verb. Weekley notes the curious contradiction in pledge (v.) to toast with a drink (1540s) and
pledge (n.) the vow to abstain from drinking (1833). Meaning student who has agreed to join a
fraternity or sorority dates from 1901.


deep (adj.)

Old English deop profound, awful, mysterious; serious, solemn; deepness, depth, deope (adv.), from
Proto-Germanic *deupaz (cognates: Old Saxon diop, Old Frisian diap, Dutch diep, Old High German
tiof, German tief, Old Norse djupr, Danish dyb, Swedish djup, Gothic diups deep), from PIE *dheub-
deep, hollow (cognates: Lithuanian dubus deep, hollow, Old Church Slavonic duno bottom, foundation,
Welsh dwfn deep, Old Irish domun world, via sense development from bottom to foundation to earth to
world).    Figurative senses were in Old English; extended 16c. to color, sound. Deep pocket wealth
is from 1951. To go off the deep end lose control of oneself is slang first recorded 1921, probably
in reference to the deep end of a swimming pool, where a person on the surface can no longer touch
bottom. When 3-D films seemed destined to be the next wave and the biggest thing to hit cinema since
talkies, they were known as deepies (1953).


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


