solicitous (adj.)

1560s, from Latin sollicitus restless, uneasy, careful, full of anxiety (see solicit). Related:
Solicitously; solicitousness.


solicitate (v.)

1540s, from Latin solicitatus, past participle of sollicitare (see solicit). Related: Solicitated;
solicitating.


solicitor (n.)

early 15c., one who urges, from Middle French soliciteur, from soliciter (see solicit). Meaning one
who conducts matters on behalf of another is from early 15c. As a name for a specific class of legal
practitioners in Britain, it is attested from 1570s. Both the fem. forms, solicitress (1630s) and
solicitrix (1610s), have been in the sexual sense, but the latter seems more common in non-
pejorative use.


solicitation (n.)

late 15c., management, from Middle French solicitation and directly from Latin solicitationem
(nominative solicitatio) vexation, disturbance, instigation, noun of action from past participle
stem of solicitare (see solicit). Meaning action of soliciting is from 1520s. Specific sexual sense
is from c.1600.


solicitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French solicitude (Modern French sollicitude), and directly from Latin
sollicitudinem (nominative solicitudo) anxiety, uneasiness of mind, noun of state from past
participle stem of solicitare (see solicit).


solicit (v.)

early 15c., to disturb, trouble, from Middle French soliciter (14c.), from Latin sollicitare to
disturb, rouse, trouble, harass; stimulate, provoke, from sollicitus agitated, from sollus whole,
entire + citus aroused, past participle of ciere shake, excite, set in motion (see cite). Related:
Solicited; soliciting.    Meaning entreat, petition is from 1520s. Meaning to further (business
affairs) evolved mid-15c. from Middle French sense of manage affairs. The sexual sense (often in
reference to prostitutes) is attested from 1710, probably from a merger of the business sense and an
earlier sense of to court or beg the favor of (a woman), attested from 1590s.


unsolicited (adj.)

1580s, unpetitioned, not approached with a request, from un- (1) not + past participle of solicit
(v.). Meaning not asked for, unsought is from 1680s.


insouciance (n.)

1799, from French insouciant carelessness, thoughtlessness, heedlessness, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ se soucier to care, from Latin sollicitare to agitate (see solicit).


insouciant (adj.)

1829, from French insouciant careless, thoughtless, heedless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + souciant
caring, present participle of soucier to care, from Latin sollicitare to agitate (see solicit).
Related: Insouciantly.


canvass (v.)

c.1500, from alternative spelling of canvas (n.) and probably meaning, originally, to toss or sift
in a canvas sheet, hence to shake out, examine carefully (1520s); to solicit votes (1550s). The
spelling with a double -s- dates from 16c. Compare Old French canabasser to examine carefully,
literally to sift through canvas. Related: Canvassed; canvassing. As a noun related to this,
attested from c.1600.


ambition (n.)

mid-14c., from Middle French ambition or directly from Latin ambitionem (nominative ambitio) a going
around, especially to solicit votes, hence a striving for favor, courting, flattery; a desire for
honor, thirst for popularity, noun of action from past participle stem of ambire to go around (see
ambient).    Rarely used in the literal sense in English, where it carries the secondary Latin sense
of eager or inordinate desire of honor or preferment. In early use always pejorative, of inordinate
or overreaching desire; ambition was grouped with pride and vainglory.


wharf (n.)

late Old English hwearf shore, bank where ships can tie up, earlier dam, embankment, from Proto-
Germanic *hwarfaz (cognates: Middle Low German werf mole, dam, wharf, German Werft shipyard,
dockyard); related to Old English hwearfian to turn, perhaps in a sense implying busy activity, from
PIE root *kwerp- to turn, revolve (cognates: Old Norse hverfa to turn round, German werben to
enlist, solicit, court, woo, Gothic hvairban to wander, Greek kartos wrist, Sanskrit surpam
winnowing fan). Wharf rat is from 1812 as type of rat common on ships and docks; extended sense
person who hangs around docks is recorded from 1836.


