solstice (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French solstice (13c.), from Latin solstitium point at which the sun seems to
stand still, especially the summer solstice, from sol sun (see sol) + past participle stem of
sistere to come to a stop, make stand still (see assist (v.)). In early use, Englished as sunstead
(late Old English sunstede).


tropic (n.)

late 14c., either of the two circles in the celestial sphere which describe the northernmost and
southernmost points of the ecliptic, from Late Latin tropicus of or pertaining to the solstice (as a
noun, one of the tropics), from Latin tropicus pertaining to a turn, from Greek tropikos of or
pertaining to a turn or change; of or pertaining to the solstice (as a noun, the solstice, short for
tropikos kyklos), from trope a turning (see trope).    The notion is of the point at which the sun
turns back after reaching its northernmost or southernmost point in the sky. Extended 1520s to the
corresponding latitudes on the earth's surface (23 degrees 28 minutes north and south); meaning
region between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn is from 1837.


solstitial (adj.)

1550s, from Latin solstitialis, from solstitium (see solstice).


dog days (n.)

1530s, from Latin dies caniculares, from Greek; so called because they occur around the time of the
heliacal rising of Sirius, the Dog Star (kyon seirios). Noted as the hottest and most unwholesome
time of the year; usually July 3 to Aug. 11, but variously calculated, depending on latitude and on
whether the greater Dog-star (Sirius) or the lesser one (Procyon) is reckoned.    The heliacal
rising of Sirius has shifted down the calendar with the precession of the equinoxes; in ancient
Egypt c.3000 B.C.E. it coincided with the summer solstice, which also was the new year and the
beginning of the inundation of the Nile. The dog association apparently began here (the star's
hieroglyph was a dog), but the reasons for it are obscure.


midwinter (n.)

also mid-winter, Old English midwinter, also midde winter; see mid + winter (n.). The middle of
winter, especially the period around the winter solstice (Dec. 21). As an adjective from mid-12c.


halcyon (adj.)

1540s, in halcyon dayes (Latin alcyonei dies, Greek alkyonides hemerai), 14 days of calm weather at
the winter solstice, when a mythical bird (identified with the kingfisher) was said to breed in a
nest floating on calm seas. From halcyon (n.), late 14c., from Latin halcyon, from Greek halkyon,
variant (perhaps a misspelling) of alkyon kingfisher, from hals sea, salt (see halo-) + kyon
conceiving, present participle of kyein to conceive, literally to swell, from PIE root *keue- to
swell. Identified in mythology with Halcyone, daughter of Aeolus, who when widowed threw herself
into the sea and became a kingfisher.


armistice (n.)

1707, from French armistice (1680s), coined on the model of Latin solstitium (see solstice), etc.,
from Latin arma arms (see arm (n.2)) + -stitium (used only in compounds), from PIE *ste-ti-,
suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    The word is attested in English from 1660s in
the Latin form armistitium. German Waffenstillstand is a loan-translation from French. Armistice Day
(1919) marked the end of the Great War of 1914-18 on Nov. 11, 1918. In Britain, after World War II,
it merged with Remembrance Day. In U.S., Armistice Day became a national holiday in 1926. In 1954,
to honor World War II and Korean War veterans as well, it was re-dubbed Veterans Day.


Sirius (n.)

brightest star by magnitude, late 14c., from Latin Sirius the Dog Star, from Greek Seirios, said to
mean literally scorching or the scorcher. But other related Greek words seem to derive from this
use, and the name might be a folk-etymologized borrowing from some other language. An Egyptian name
for it was Sothis. The connection of the star with scorching heat is from its ancient heliacal
rising at the summer solstice (see dog days). Also see dog star. Related: Sirian. The constellation
Canis Major seems to have grown from the star, not the other way.    Homer made much of it as
[Kyon], but his <b>Dog</b> doubtless was limited to the star Sirius, as among the ancients generally
till, at some unknown date, the constellation was formed as we have it, -- indeed till long
afterwards, for we find many allusions to the Dog in which we are uncertain whether the
constellation or its lucida is referred to. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Canis Major in Star Names and
Their Meanings, London: 1899]


cancer (n.)

Old English cancer spreading sore, cancer (also canceradl), from Latin cancer a crab, later,
malignant tumor, from Greek karkinos, which, like the Modern English word, has three meanings: crab,
tumor, and the zodiac constellation (late Old English), from PIE root *qarq- to be hard (like the
shell of a crab); cognates: Sanskrit karkatah crab, karkarah hard; and perhaps cognate with PIE root
*qar-tu- hard, strong, source of English hard.    Greek physicians Hippocrates and Galen, among
others, noted similarity of crabs to some tumors with swollen veins. Meaning person born under the
zodiac sign of Cancer is from 1894. The sun being in Cancer at the summer solstice, the
constellation had association in Latin writers with the south and with summer heat. Cancer stick
cigarette is from 1959.


