solvent (n.)

substance able to dissolve other substances, 1670s, from Latin solventem (see solvent (n.)).


solvent (adj.)

1650s, able to pay all one owes, from French solvent, from Latin solventem (nominative solvens),
present participle of solvere loosen, dissolve (see solve).


solvation (n.)

1909, noun of action from solvate, a verb used in chemistry, from solvent + -ate (2).


alkahest (n.)

universal solvent sought by alchemists, 1640s, from French alcahest, from Medieval Latin alcahest, a
pseudo-Arabic word coined by Paracelsus (see alchemy).


insolvent (adj.)

1590s, unable to pay one's debts, from in- (1) not + Latin solventem paying (see solvent).
Originally of one who was not a trader; only traders could become bankrupt.


solvency (n.)

1727, from solvent + -cy.


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


