soothsayer (n.)

mid-14c., zo&#254; ziggere (Kentish), one who speaks truth,; late 14c., sothseggere, fortune-teller;
see sooth + say. Old English had so&eth;sagu act of speaking the truth.


soothsay (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from soothsayer. As a noun from 1540s.


prophet (n.)

late 12c., person who speaks for God; one who foretells, inspired preacher, from Old French
prophete, profete prophet, soothsayer (11c., Modern French proph&#232;te) and directly from Latin
propheta, from Greek prophetes (Doric prophatas) an interpreter, spokesman, especially of the gods,
inspired preacher or teacher, from pro- before (see pro-) + root of phanai to speak, from PIE *bha-
(2) speak (see fame (n.)).    The Greek word was used in Septuagint for Hebrew nabj soothsayer.
Early Latin writers translated Greek prophetes with Latin vates, but the Latinized form propheta
predominated in post-Classical times, chiefly due to Christian writers, probably because of pagan
associations of vates. In English, meaning prophetic writer of the Old Testament is from late 14c.
Non-religious sense is from 1848; used of Muhammad from 1610s (translating Arabic al-nabiy, and
sometimes also al-rasul, properly the messenger). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by witga.


divine (n.)

c.1300, soothsayer, from Old French devin, from Latin divinus (adj.); see divine (adj.). Meaning
ecclesiastic, theologian is from late 14c.


mantic (adj.)

1850, from Greek mantikos prophetic, oracular, of or for a soothsayer, from mantis prophet,
literally one touched by divine madness (see mantis). Related: Mantical (1580s).


sibyl (n.)

woman supposed to possess powers of prophecy, female soothsayer, c.1200, from Old French sibile,
from Latin Sibylla, from Greek Sibylla, name for any of several prophetesses consulted by ancient
Greeks and Romans, of uncertain origin. Said to be from Doric Siobolla, from Attic Theoboule divine
wish.


-mancy

word-forming element meaning divination by means of, from Old French -mancie, from Late Latin
-mantia, from Greek manteia oracle, divination, from mantis seer, prophet, soothsayer, related to
mania madness, frenzy (see mania).


Merlin

sorcerer and soothsayer in Arthurian legends, from Old French form of Welsh Myrddhin, probably from
Old Celtic *Mori-dunon, literally of the sea-hill, from *mori sea (see mere (n.)) + dunom hill (see
dune).


divine (v.)

to conjure, to guess, originally to make out by supernatural insight, mid-14c., from Old French
deviner, from Vulgar Latin *devinare, dissimilated from *divinare, from Latin divinus (see divine
(adj.)), which also meant soothsayer. Related: Divined; diviner; divining. Divining rod (or wand)
attested from 1650s.


wiseacre (n.)

1590s, partial translation of Middle Dutch wijssegger soothsayer (with no derogatory connotation),
probably altered by association with Middle Dutch segger sayer from Old High German wizzago prophet,
from wizzan to know, from Proto-Germanic *wit- to know (see wit (v.)). The deprecatory sense of one
who pretends to know everything may have come through confusion with obsolete English segger sayer,
which also had a sense of braggart (mid-15c.).


haruspex (n.)

1580s, from Latin haruspex (plural haruspices) soothsayer by means of entrails, first element from
PIE *ghere- gut, entrail (see yarn); second element from Latin spic- beholding, inspecting, from PIE
*speks he who sees, from root *spek- to observe (see scope (n.1)). The practice is Etruscan.
Related: Haruspical; haruspication.


Edda (n.)

1771, by some identified with the name of the old woman in the Old Norse poem Rigs&thorn;ul, by
others derived from Old Norse o&eth;r spirit, mind, passion, song, poetry (cognate with Old Irish
faith poet, Welsh gwawd poem, Old English wo&thorn; sound, melody, song, Latin vates seer,
soothsayer; see wood (adj.)).    It is the name given to two Icelandic books, the first a miscellany
of poetry, mythology, and grammar by Snorri Sturluson (d.1241), since 1642 called the Younger or
Prose Edda; and a c.1200 collection of ancient Germanic poetry and religious tales, called the Elder
or Poetic Edda.


pray (v.)

early 13c., ask earnestly, beg, also (c.1300) pray to a god or saint, from Old French preier to pray
(c.900, Modern French prier), from Vulgar Latin *precare (also source of Italian pregare), from
Latin precari ask earnestly, beg, entreat, from *prex (plural preces, genitive precis) prayer,
request, entreaty, from PIE root *prek- to ask, request, entreat (cognates: Sanskrit prasna-,
Avestan frashna- question; Old Church Slavonic prositi, Lithuanian prasyti to ask, beg; Old High
German frahen, German fragen, Old English fricgan to ask a question).    Parenthetical expression I
pray you, please, if you will, attested from 1510s, contracted to pray 16c. Related: Prayed;
praying. Praying mantis attested from 1809. The Gardener's Monthly of July 1861 lists other names
for it as camel cricket, soothsayer, and rear horse.


Wicca (n.)

An Old English masc. noun meaning male witch, wizard, soothsayer, sorcerer, astrologer, magician;
see witch. Use of the word in modern contexts traces to English folklorist Gerald Gardner
(1884-1964), who is said to have joined circa 1939 an occult group in New Forest, Hampshire,
England, for which he claimed an unbroken tradition to medieval times. Gardner seems to have first
used it in print in 1954, in his book Witchcraft Today (Witches were the Wica or wise people, with
herbal  knowledge and a working occult teaching usually used for good ....). In published and
unpublished material, he apparently only ever used the word as a mass noun referring to adherents of
the practice and not as the name of the practice itself. Some of his followers continue to use it in
this sense. According to Gardner's book The Meaning of Witchcraft (1959), the word, as used in the
initiation ceremony, played a key role in his experience:    I realised that I had stumbled upon
something interesting; but I was half-initiated before the word, 'Wica' which they used hit me like
a thunderbolt, and I knew where I was, and that the Old Religion still existed. And so I found
myself in the Circle, and there took the usual oath of secrecy, which bound me not to reveal certain
things.    In the late 1960s the term came into use as the title of a modern pagan movement
associated with witchcraft.  The first printed reference in this usage seems to be 1969, in The
Truth About Witchcraft by freelance  author Hans Holzer:    If the practice of the Old Religion,
which is also called Wicca (Craft of the Wise), and thence, witchcraft, is a reputable and useful
cult, then it is worthy of public interest.    And, quoting witch Alex Sanders:    No, a witch
wedding still needs a civil ceremony to make it legal. Wicca itself as a religion is not registered
yet. But it is about time somebody registered it, I think. I've done all I can to call attention to
our religion.    Sanders was a highly visible representative of neo-pagan Witchcraft in the late
1960s and early 1970s. During this time he appears to have popularized use of the term in this
sense.  Later books c.1989 teaching modernized witchcraft using the same term account for its rise
and popularity, especially in U.S.


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


