sophisticated (adj.)

c.1600, mixed with a foreign substance, impure; no longer simple or natural, past participle
adjective from sophisticate (v.). Of persons, with a positive sense, worldly-wise, discriminating,
cultured, from 1895.


sophisticate (v.)

c.1400, make impure by admixture, from Medieval Latin sophisticatus, past participle of sophisticare
(see sophistication). From c.1600 as corrupt, delude by sophistry; from 1796 as deprive of
simplicity. Related: Sophisticated; sophisticating. As a noun meaning sophisticated person from
1921.


mod (n.1)

tidy, sophisticated teen (usually contrasted with rocker), 1960, slang shortening of modern.


unsophisticated (adj.)

1620s, unmixed, from un- (1) not + sophisticated (adj.). Meaning ingenuous, natural, inexperienced
is recorded from 1660s.


chi-chi (adj.)

also chichi, extremely chic, sophisticated, also pretentious fussiness, 1908, from French chichi
airs, fuss. Perhaps, like frou-frou, imitative.


algorithm (n.)

1690s, from French algorithme, refashioned (under mistaken connection with Greek arithmos number)
from Old French algorisme the Arabic numeral system (13c.), from Medieval Latin algorismus, a
mangled transliteration of Arabic al-Khwarizmi native of Khwarazm, surname of the mathematician
whose works introduced sophisticated mathematics to the West (see algebra). The earlier form in
Middle English was algorism (early 13c.), from Old French.


file (v.)

to place (papers) in consecutive order for future reference, mid-15c., from Middle French filer
string documents on a wire for preservation or reference, from fil thread, string (12c.), from Latin
filum a thread, string, from PIE *gwhis-lom (cognates: Armenian jil sinew, string, line, Lithuanian
gysla vein, sinew, Old Church Slavonic zila vein), from root *gwhi- thread, tendon. The notion is of
documents hung up on a line. File (filacium) is a threed or wyer, whereon writs, or other exhibits
in courts, are fastened for the better keeping of them. [Cowel, The Interpreter, 1607]    Methods
have become more sophisticated, but the word has stuck. Related: Filed; filing.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


