sophistic (adj.)

1540s, from Latin sophisticus, from Greek sophistikos like a sophist, sophistical, from sophistes
(see sophist). Related: Sophistical (late 15c.); sophistically (late 14c.).


sophistication (n.)

early 15c., use of sophistry; fallacious argument intended to mislead; adulteration; an adulterated
or adulterating substance, from Medieval Latin sophisticationem (nominative sophisticatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of sophisticare adulterate, cheat quibble, from Latin sophisticus
of sophists, from Greek sophistikos of or pertaining to a sophist, from sophistes a wise man,
master, teacher (see sophist). Meaning wordly wisdom, refinement, discrimination is attested from
1850.


sophistry (n.)

specious but fallacious reasoning, mid-14c., from Old French sophistrie (Modern French sophisterie),
from Medieval Latin sophistria, from Latin sophista, sophistes (see sophist). Sophistry applies to
reasoning as sophism to a single argument [Century Dictionary].


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


gymnosophist (n.)

c.1400, from Greek gymnosophistai the naked philosophers, from gymnos naked (see naked) + sophistes
sophist (see sophist). Ancient Hindu holy men whose self-denial extended to clothes; they were known
to the Greeks through the reports of Alexander the Great's soldiers.


deipnosophist (n.)

gourmand, 1650s, from Greek deipnosophistes one learned in the mysteries of the kitchen, from
deipnon chief meal, dinner (of unknown origin) + sophistes master of a craft (see sophist). the word
has come down thanks to Deipnosophistai, 3c. work on gastronomy by Athenaeus.


Sophocles

Athenian tragic poet (c.496-406 B.C.E.), the name is Greek Sophokles, literally famed for wisdom,
from sophos wise (see sophist) + *-kles fame (see Damocles). Related: Sophoclean.


gorgeous (adj.)

late 15c., splendid, showy (of clothing), from Middle French gorgias elegant, fashionable, of
unknown origin; perhaps literally necklace (and thus fond of jewelry), from Old French gorge bosom,
throat, also something adorning the throat. A connection to the Greek proper name Gorgias
(supposedly in reference to a notorious sophist) also has been proposed. Related: Gorgeousness.


Sophia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophia skill, knowledge of, acquaintance with; sound judgement,
practical wisdom; cunning, shrewdness; philosophy, also wisdom personified, abstract noun from
sophos wise (see sophist). Saint Sophia in ancient church names and place names in the East is not
necessarily a reference to a person; the phrase also is the English translation of the Greek for
divine wisdom, holy wisdom, to which churches were dedicated.


sophism (n.)

early 15c., earlier sophime (mid-14c.), specious but fallacious argument devised for purposes of
deceit or to exercise one's ingenuity, from Old French sophime a fallacy, false argument (Modern
French sophisme), from Latin sophisma, from Greek sophisma clever device, skillful act, stage-trick,
from stem of sophizesthai become wise (see sophist).


sophomore (n.)

1680s, student in the second year of university study, literally arguer, altered from sophumer
(1650s, from sophume, archaic variant form of sophism), probably by influence of folk etymology
derivation from Greek sophos wise + moros foolish, dull. The original reference might be to the
dialectic exercises that formed a large part of education in the middle years. At Oxford and
Cambridge, a sophister (from sophist with spurious -er as in philosopher) was a second- or third-
year student (what Americans would call a junior might be a senior sophister).


theosophy (n.)

1640s (implied in theosophical), knowledge of divine things obtained through mystic study, from
Medieval Latin theosophia (c.880), from Late Greek theosophia (c.500) wisdom concerning God or
things divine, from Greek theosophos one wise about God, from theos god (see theo-) + sophia skill,
knowledge of, acquaintance with; philosophy, from sophos wise, learned (see sophist).    Applied
variously over the years, including to the followers of Swedenborg. Taken as the name of a modern
philosophical system (sometimes called Esoteric Buddhism), founded in New York 1875 as Theosophical
Society by Madame Blavatsky and others, which has elements of Hinduism and Buddhism and claims
supernatural knowledge of the divinity and his words deeper than that obtained from empiricism.
Related: Theosophist.


philosopher (n.)

from Old English philosophe, from Latin philosophus philosopher, from Greek philosophos philosopher,
sage, one who speculates on the nature of things and truth, literally lover of wisdom, from philos
loving (see -phile) + sophos wise, a sage (see sophist). Modern form with -r appears early 14c.,
from an Anglo-French or Old French variant of philosophe, with an agent-noun ending.  Pythagoras was
the first who called himself philosophos, instead of sophos, 'wise man,' since this latter term was
suggestive of immodesty. [Klein] Philosophy also was used of alchemy in Middle Ages, hence
Philosophers' stone (late 14c., translating Medieval Latin lapis philosophorum, early 12c.), a
reputed solid substance supposed by alchemists to change baser metals into gold or silver; also
identified with the elixir and thus given the attribute of prolonging life indefinitely and curing
wounds and disease. (French pierre philosophale, German der Stein der Weisen).


