sordid (adj.)

early 15c., festering, from Latin sordidus dirty, filthy, foul, vile, mean, base, from sordere be
dirty, be shabby, related to sordes dirt, filth, from PIE *swrd-e-, from root *swordo- black, dirty
(cognates: Old English sweart black). Sense of foul, low, mean first recorded 1610s. Related:
Sordidly; sordidness.


underbelly (n.)

c.1600, from under + belly (n.). In figurative sense of most vulnerable part it is recorded from
Churchill's 1942 speech. Sometimes used erroneously or euphemistically in sense of seamy or sordid
part of anything.


illiberal (adj.)

1530s, ungentlemanly, base, mean, from Middle French illiberal (14c.), from Latin illiberalis
ungenerous, mean, sordid; unworthy of a freeman, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + liberalis (see liberal). A sense of narrow-minded politically; unconcerned with the
rights or liberties of others is attested from 1640s, and might conceivably be revived to take up
some of the burden that drags down conservative.


sleazy (adj.)

1640s, downy, fuzzy, later flimsy, unsubstantial (1660s), of unknown origin; one theory is that it
is a corruption of Silesia, the German region, where thin linen or cotton fabric was made for
export. Silesia in reference to cloth is attested in English from 1670s; and sleazy as an
abbreviated form is attested from 1670), but OED is against this. Sense of sordid is from 1941.
Related: Sleazily; sleaziness.    A day is a more magnificent cloth than any muslin, the mechanism
that makes it is infinitely cunninger, and you shall not conceal the sleazy, fraudulent, rotten
hours you have slipped into the piece, nor fear that any honest thread, or straighter steel, or more
inflexible shaft, will not testify in the web. [Emerson, The Conduct of Life, 1860]


swart (adj.)

Old English sweart black, dark, of night, clouds, also figurative, wicked, infamous, from Proto-
Germanic *swarta- (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, and Middle Dutch swart, Dutch zwart, Old Norse
svartr, German schwarz, Gothic swarts dark-colored, black), from PIE root *swordo- dirty, dark,
black (source of sordid). The true Germanic word, surviving in the Continental languages, displaced
in English by black. Of skin color of persons from late 14c. Related: Swartest.


venal (adj.)

1650s, capable of being obtained for a price; that can be corrupted; 1660s, offered for sale, from
French v&eacute;nal, Old French venel for sale (of prostitutes, etc.; 12c.), from Latin venalis for
sale, to be sold; capable of being bribed, from venum (nominative *venus) for sale, from PIE root
*wes- (1) to buy, sell (cognates: Sanskrit vasnah purchase money, vasnam reward, vasnayati he
bargains, haggles; Greek onos price paid, purchase, oneisthai to buy). Typically with a bad sense of
ready to sell one's services or influence for money and from sordid motives; to be bought basely or
meanly.


pornography (n.)

1843, ancient obscene painting, especially in temples of Bacchus, from French pornographie, from
Greek pornographos (one) depicting prostitutes, from porne prostitute, originally bought, purchased
(with an original notion, probably of female slave sold for prostitution), related to pernanai to
sell, from PIE root *per- (5) to traffic in, to sell (see price (n.)) + graphein to write (see
-graphy). A brothel in ancient Greek was a porneion.    Pornography, or obscene painting, which in
the time of the Romans was practiced with the grossest license, prevailed especially at no
particular period in Greece, but was apparently tolerated to a considerable extent at all times.
Parrhasius, Aristides, Pausanias, Nicophanes, Chaerephanes, Arellius, and a few other [pornographoi]
are mentioned as having made themselves notorious for this species of license. [Charles Anthon,
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, New York, 1843]    In reference to modern works by 1859
(originally French novels), later as a charge against native literature; sense of obscene pictures
in modern times is from 1906. Also sometimes used late 19c. for description of prostitutes as a
matter of public hygiene. The Medical Archives in 1873 proposed porniatria for the lengthy and
really meaningless expression 'social evil hospital' ....     I shall not today attempt further to
define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description [hard-
core pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I
see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that. [U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter
Stewart, concurring opinion, Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964]    In ancient contexts, often paired with
rhypography, genre painting of low, sordid, or unsuitable subjects. Pornocracy (1860) is the
dominating influence of harlots, used specifically of the government of Rome during the first half
of the 10th century by Theodora and her daughters. Pornotopia (1966) was coined to describe the
ideal erotic-world of pornographic movies.


