sound (n.1)

noise, what is heard, sensation produced through the ear, late 13c., soun, from Old French son
sound, musical note, voice, from Latin sonus sound, a noise, from PIE *swon-o-, from root *swen- to
sound (cognates: Sanskrit svanati it sounds, svanah sound, tone; Latin sonare to sound; Old Irish
senim the playing of an instrument; Old English geswin music, song, swinsian to sing; Old Norse
svanr, Old English swan swan, properly the sounding bird).    The terminal -d was established
c.1350-1550 as part of a tendency to add -d- after -n-. First record of sound barrier is from 1939.
Sound check is from 1977; sound effects is 1909, originally live accompaniments to silent films.
The experts of Victor ... will ... arrange for the synchronized orchestration and sound effects for
this picture, in which airplane battles will have an important part. [Exhibitor's Herald &amp;
Moving Picture World, April 28, 1928]


sound (v.1)

early 13c., sounen to be audible, produce vibrations affecting the ear, from Old French soner
(Modern French sonner) and directly from Latin sonare to sound (see sonata). From late 14c. as cause
something (an instrument, etc.) to produce sound. Related: Sounded; sounding.


sound (v.2)

fathom, probe, measure the depth of, mid-14c. (implied in sounding), from Old French sonder, from
sonde sounding line, perhaps from the same Germanic source that yielded Old English sund water, sea
(see sound (n.2)). Barnhart dismisses the old theory that it is from Latin subundare. Figurative use
from 1570s.


sound-proof (adj.)

1853, from sound (n.1) + proof (n.).


sound (adj.)

free from special defect or injury, c.1200, from Old English gesund sound, safe, having the organs
and faculties complete and in perfect action, from Proto-Germanic *sunda-, from Germanic root *swen-
to- healthy, strong (cognates: Old Saxon gisund, Old Frisian sund, Dutch gezond, Old High German
gisunt, German gesund healthy, as in the post-sneezing interjection gesundheit; also Old English
swi&eth; strong, Gothic swin&thorn;s strong, German geschwind fast, quick), with connections in
Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic. Meaning right, correct, free from error is from mid-15c. Meaning
financially solid or safe is attested from c.1600; of sleep, undisturbed, from 1540s. Sense of
holding accepted opinions is from 1520s.


Soundex (n.)

phonetic coding system, 1959, from sound (n.1) + brand-name suffix -ex.


soundly (adv.)

c.1400, safely; also deeply (of sleep), from sound (adj.) + -ly (2). From 1570s as thoroughly.


soundtrack (n.)

1929, from sound (n.1) + track (n.).


soundness (n.)

late 14c., from sound (adj.) + -ness.


soundless (adj.)

c.1600 from sound (n.1) + -less. Related: Soundlessly; soundlessness.


sound (n.2)

narrow channel of water, c.1300, from Old Norse sund a strait, swimming, or from cognate Old English
sund act of swimming, stretch of water one can swim across, a strait of the sea, both from Proto-
Germanic *sundam-, from *swum-to-, suffixed form of Germanic root *swem- to move, stir, swim (see
swim (v.)).


consonant (n.)

early 14c., sound other than a vowel, from Latin consonantem (nominative consonans), present
participle of consonare to sound together, sound aloud, from com- with (see com-) + sonare to sound
(see sonata). Consonants were thought of as sounds that are only produced together with vowels.


phoneme (n.)

distinctive sound or group of sounds, 1889, from French phon&#232;me, from Greek phonema a sound
made, voice, from phonein to sound or speak, from phone sound, voice, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak
(see fame (n.)).


sonata (n.)

1690s, from Italian sonata piece of instrumental music, literally sounded (i.e. played on an
instrument, as opposed to cantata sung), fem. past participle of sonare to sound, from Latin sonare
to sound, from PIE *swene-, from root *swen- to sound (see sound (n.1)). Meaning narrowed by mid-
18c. toward application to large-scale works in three or four movements.


unison (n.)

1570s, note having the same pitch as another; identity in pitch of two or more sounds; interval
between tones of the same pitch, especially the interval of an octave, from Middle French unisson
unison, accord of sound (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin unisonus having one sound, sounding
the same, from Late Latin unisonius in immediate sequence in the scale, monotonous, from Latin uni-
one (see one) + sonus sound (see sound (n.1)). Figurative sense of harmonious agreement is first
attested 1640s.


schm-

substituted for the initial sound of a word and reduplicated with it to convey derision (as in
Oedipus schmoedipus in the punchline of the old joke about the Jewish mother and the psychiatrist),
1929, from the numerous Yiddish words that begin with this sound.


quadraphonic (adj.)

1969, irregular formation from quadri- four + phonic, from Greek phone sound, voice (see fame (n.)).
The goal was to reproduce front-to-back sound distribution in addition to side-to-side stereo. The
later term for the same idea, surround sound, is preferable to this.


bam

interjection, imitative of the sound of a hard hit, first recorded 1922 (from 1917 as the sound of
an artillery shell bursting). Middle English had a verb bammen to hit or strike (late 14c.). A
literary work from c.1450 represents the sound of repeated impact by Lus, bus! las, das!, and Middle
English had lushe a stroke, blow (c.1400); lushen to strike, knock, beat (c.1300).


twang (n.)

1550s, of imitative origin. Originally the sound of plucked bows and strings; extension to a nasal
vocal sound is first recorded 1660s. The verb is first attested 1540s. Related: Twanged; twanging.


catechesis (n.)

from Greek katekhesis instruction by word of mouth, from katekhein to instruct orally, originally to
resound (with sense evolution via to sound (something) in someone's ear; to teach by word of mouth.
From kata- down (in this case, thoroughly) + ekhein to sound, ring, from ekhe sound, from PIE
*(s)wagh- to resound (see echo (n.)). Related: Catachectic; catachectical.


ch

digraph used in Old French for the tsh sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but
not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French tsha. This was introduced to English after the Norman
Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste, charity, chief (adj.). Under French
influence, -ch- also was inserted into Anglo-Saxon words that had the same sound (such as bleach,
chest, church) which in Old English still was written with a simple -c-, and into those that had
formerly been spelled with a -c- and pronounced k such as chin and much.    As French evolved, the t
sound dropped out of it, so in later loan-words from France ch- has only the sound sh- (chauffeur,
machine (n.), chivalry, etc.).    It turns up as well in words from classical languages (chaos,
echo, etc.). Most uses of -ch- in Roman Latin were in words from Greek, which would be pronounced
correctly as k + h, as in blockhead, but most Romans would have said merely k. Sometimes ch- is
written to keep -c- hard before a front vowel, as still in modern Italian.    In some languages
(Welsh, Spanish, Czech) ch- can be treated as a separate letter and words in it are alphabetized
after -c- (or, in Czech and Slovak, after -h-). The sound also is heard in more distant languages
(as in cheetah, chintz), and the digraph also is used to represent the sound in Scottish loch.


sough (v.)

to make a moaning or murmuring sound, Old English swogan to sound, roar, howl, rustle, whistle, from
Proto-Germanic *swoganan (cognates: Old Saxon swogan to rustle, Gothic gaswogjan to sigh), from PIE
imitative root *(s)wagh- (cognates: Greek echo, Latin vagire to cry, roar, sound). The noun is late
14c., from the verb.


smack (n.2)

smart, sharp sound made by the lips, 1560s, from smack (v.1). Meaning a loud kiss is recorded from
c.1600. Meaning sharp sound made by hitting something with the flat of the hand is from c.1746.


ring (v.1)

sound a bell, Old English hringan sound, give a certain resonant sound when struck; announce by
bells, from Proto-Germanic *khrengan (cognates: Old Norse hringja, Swedish ringa, Middle Dutch
ringen), probably of imitative origin. Related: Rang; rung. Originally a weak verb, strong
inflection began in early Middle English by influence of sing, etc. To ring down a theatrical
curtain is from 1772, from the custom of signaling for it by ringing a bell. To ring up a purchase
on a cash register is by 1937, from the bell that sounded. Specialized sense give a resonant sound
when struck as an indication of genuineness or purity, with transferred use (as in to ring hollow)
is from 1610s.


chi (n.)

22nd letter of the Greek alphabet, representing a -kh- sound (see ch). The letter is shaped like an
X, and so the Greek letter name was used figuratively to signify such a shape or arrangement (as in
khiasma two things placed crosswise; khiastos arranged diagonally; marked with an X; khiazein to
mark with an 'X', to write the letter 'X'). Some dialects used chi to represent the -ks- sound
properly belonging to xi; Latin picked this up and the sound value of chi in Latin-derived alphabets
is now that of English X.


phonics (n.)

1680s, science of sound, from Greek phone sound (see fame (n.)) + -ics. As a method of teaching
reading it is first attested 1908, though the system dates from 1844.


resound (v.)

late 14c., resownen, from Old French resoner reverberate (12c., Modern French r&#233;sonner), from
Latin resonare sound again, resound, echo, from re- back, again (see re-) + sonare to sound (see
sonata). Spelling influenced from mid-15c. by sound (v.). Related: Resounded; resounding.


timbre (n.)

characteristic quality of a musical sound, 1849, from French timbre quality of a sound, earlier
sound of a bell, from Old French, bell without a clapper, originally small drum, probably via
Medieval Greek *timbanon, from Greek tympanon kettledrum (see tympanum). Timbre was used in Old
French (13c.) and Middle English (14c.) to render Latin tympanum in Ps. 150.


whicker (v.)

1650s, snigger, imitative (compare snicker). As imitative of a sound made by a horse, from 1753. As
the sound of something beating the air, from 1920. Related: Whickered; whickering.


thud (v.)

Old English &thorn;yddan to strike, stab, thrust, press, of imitative origin. Sense of hit with a
dull sound first recorded 1796. Related: Thudded; thudding. The noun is attested from 1510s as blast
of wind; 1530s as loud sound.


C

third letter of the alphabet. Alphabetic writing came to Rome via the southern Etruscan Caeretan
script, in which gamma was written as a crescent. Early Romans made little use of Greek kappa and
used gamma for both the g and k sounds, the latter more frequently, so that the k sound came to be
seen as the proper one for gamma. To restore a dedicated symbol for the g sound, a modified gamma
was introduced c.250 B.C.E. as G. In classical Latin -c- has only the value k, and thus it passed to
Celtic and, via Irish monks, to Anglo-Saxon, where -k- was known but little used.    In Old French,
many k sounds drifted to ts and by 13c., s, but still were written with a -c-. Thus the 1066
invasion brought to the English language a more vigorous use of -k- and a flood of French and Latin
words in which -c- represented s (as in cease, ceiling, circle). By 15c. native English words with
-s- were being respelled with -c- for s (as in ice, mice, lice). In some words from Italian,
meanwhile, the -c- has a ch sound (a sound evolution in Italian that parallels the Old French one).


Z

not a native letter in Old English; in Anglo-French words it represents the ts sound (as in Anglo-
French fiz, from Latin filius, modern Fitz); from late 13c. it began to be used for the voiced s
sound and had fully taken that role by 1400. For letter name, see zed.    Thou whoreson Zed, thou
vnnecessary Letter. [King Lear, II.ii.69]    Series of zs to represent a buzzing sound first
attested 1852; zees spell of sleep, a nap is slang first recorded 1963, American English student
slang.


sane (adj.)

1721, back-formation from sanity or else from Latin sanus sound, healthy, in figurative or
transferred use, of sound mind, rational, sane, also, of style, correct; of uncertain origin. Used
earlier, of the body, with the sense of healthy (1620s). Related: Sanely.


supersonic (adj.)

1919, of or having to do with sound waves beyond the limit of human hearing, from super- + sonic.
Attested from 1934 in sense of exceeding the speed of sound (especially as a measure of aircraft
speed), leaving the original sense to ultrasonic (1923).


phono-

word-forming element meaning sound, voice, from Greek phono-, comb. form of phone voice, sound (see
fame (n.)).


resonance (n.)

mid-15c., in acoustics, prolongation of sound by reverberation; 1660s, act of resonating; from
Middle French resonance (15c.), from Latin resonantia echo, from resonare to sound again (see
resound). Earlier in same sense was resonation (early 15c.).


tone (n.)

mid-14c., musical sound or note, from Old French ton musical sound, speech, words (13c.) and
directly from Latin tonus a sound, tone, accent, literally stretching (in Medieval Latin, a term
peculiar to music), from Greek tonos vocal pitch, raising of voice, accent, key in music, originally
a stretching, tightening, taut string, related to teinein to stretch (see tenet). Sense of manner of
speaking is from c.1600. First reference to firmness of body is from 1660s. As prevailing state of
manners from 1735; as style in speaking or writing which reveals attitude from 1765. Tone-deaf is
from 1880; tone-poem from 1845.


clang (v.)

1570s, echoic (originally of trumpets and birds), akin to or from Latin clangere resound, ring, and
Greek klange sharp sound, from PIE *klang-, nasalized form of root *kleg- to cry, sound. Related:
Clanged; clanging.


cedilla (n.)

c.1600, from Spanish cedilla, zedilla, literally little z, from a Latin-like diminutive of Greek
zeta the letter 'z'. The mark (formerly also used in Spanish) was derived from that letter and
indicates a soft sound in letters in positions where normally they have a hard sound. See zed.


burr (n.)

rough sound of the letter -r- (especially that common in Northumberland), 1760, later extended to
northern accented speech in general. Possibly the sound of the word is imitative of the speech
peculiarity itself, or it was adapted from one of the senses of bur (q.v.), perhaps from the phrase
to have a bur in (one's) throat (late 14c.), which was a figure of speech for feel a choking
sensation, huskiness. OED says the Scottish -r- is a lingual trill, not a true burr.


ablaut (n.)

systematic vowel alteration in the root of a word to indicate shades of meaning or tense, a
characteristic of Indo-European languages, 1849, from German Ablaut, literally off-sound, coined by
J.P. Zweigel in 1568 from ab off + Laut sound, tone, from Old High German hlut (see listen).
Popularized by Jacob Grimm.


baa

imitative sound of a sheep, attested from 1580s, but probably older, as baa is recorded before this
a name for a child's toy sheep. Compare Latin bee sound made by a sheep (Varro), balare to bleat;
Greek blekhe a bleating; Catalan be a sheep.


stridulous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin stridulus giving a shrill sound, creaking, from stridere to utter an inarticulate
sound, grate, creak (see strident). Stridulation is from 1831. Stridulate (v.) first recorded 1838.
Related: Stridulated; stridulating; stridulously; stridulousness.


Sophronia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophronia, from sophron (genitive sophronos) discreet, prudent,
sensible, having control over sensual desires, moderate, chaste, literally of sound mind, from sos
safe, sound, whole + phren midriff, heart, mind (see phreno-).


tick (n.2)

mid-15c., light touch or tap, probably from tick (v.) and cognate with Dutch tik, Middle High German
zic, and perhaps echoic. Meaning sound made by a clock is probably first recorded 1540s; tick-tock
as the sound of a clock is recorded from 1845.


sh-

sound represented in Old English by -sc- (fisc fish), which originally was pronounced -sk- but which
by late Old English had softened to -sh-. Modern English words with -sc- mostly are imports
(generally Scandinavian).    The sh sound did not exist in Old French, therefore French scribes
after the Norman conquest often represented it with -ssh- in medial and final positions, and sch- in
initial positions (schape, schamful, schaft for shape, shameful, shaft). But the spelling -sh- has
been standard since Caxton, probably as a worn-down form of Middle English -sch-.    In some East
Anglian texts from 14c.-15c., x- is used (xal, xulde for shall, should), which would have given the
language a very different look had it prevailed, but the London-based sh- ended up as the standard
form. The same Germanic sound has become, by natural evolution, modern German and Dutch sch-,
Scandinavian sk-.


phonograph (n.)

1835, character representing a sound, literally writer of sounds, from phono- sound + -graph
instrument for recording; something written. Meaning an instrument that produces sounds from records
(talking phonograph, invented by Thomas A. Edison) it is attested from 1877. The recording made from
it at first was called a phonogram (1879).


rumble (v.)

late 14c., make a deep, heavy, continuous sound, also move with a rolling, thundering sound, also
create disorder and confusion, probably related to Middle Dutch rommelen to rumble, Middle High
German rummeln, Old Norse rymja to shout, roar, all of imitative origin. Related: Rumbled; rumbling.


umlaut (n.)

1852, from German umlaut change of sound, from um about (see ambi-) + laut sound, from Old High
German hlut (see listen). Coined 1774 by poet Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock (1724-1803) but first
used in its current sense modification of vowels 1819 by linguist Jakob Grimm (1785-1863).


sonic (adj.)

1923, from Latin sonus sound (see sound (n.1)) + -ic. Sonic boom is attested from 1952.


