sour (adj.)

Old English sur sour, tart, acid, fermented, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates: Old Norse
surr, Middle Dutch suur, Dutch zuur, Old High German sur, German Sauer), from PIE root *suro- sour,
salty, bitter (cognates: Old Church Slavonic syru, Russian syroi moist, raw; Lithuanian suras salty,
suris cheese).    Meaning having a peevish disposition is from early 13c. Sense in whisky sour
(1885) is with lemon added (1862). Sour cream is attested from 1855. French sur sour, tart (12c.) is
a Germanic loan-word.


sour (v.)

c.1300, from sour (adj.). Compare Old High German suren, German s&#228;uern. Related: Soured;
souring.


sourball (n.)

1900 as constantly grumbling person; 1914 as a type of candy; from sour (adj.) + ball (n.1).


sourpuss (n.)

1937, from sour (adj.) + puss (n.2) face.


sourness (n.)

Old English surnes; see sour (adj.) + -ness.


sourly (adv.)

1530s, from sour (adj.) + -ly (2).


sourdough (n.)

early 14c., leavened bread, also leaven (late 14c.), from sour (adj.) + dough. Meaning fermented
dough is from 1868. The meaning Arctic prospector or pioneer is from 1898 Yukon gold rush, from the
practice of saving a lump of fermented dough as leaven for raising bread baked during the winter.


sorrel (n.)

small perennial plant, late 14c., from Old French surele (12c., Modern French surelle), from sur
sour, from Frankish *sur or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates:
Old High German, Old English sur sour; see sour (adj.)). So called for the taste of its leaves.


acidulous (adj.)

1769, sub-acidic, used figuratively for sour-tempered; from Latin acidulus slightly sour, a
diminutive of acidus (see acid (adj.)).


acerbic (adj.)

1865, originally, and usually, figurative: sour, harsh, severe (of speech, manners, etc.), from
Latin acerbus harsh to the taste, sharp, bitter, sour (see acerbity) + -ic.


crab (n.2)

fruit of the wild apple tree, c.1300, crabbe, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish
krabb&auml;pple), of obscure origin. The combination of bad-tempered, combative and sour in the two
nouns crab naturally yielded a verb meaning of to vex, irritate (c.1400), later to complain
irritably, find fault (c.1500). The noun meaning sour person is from 1570s.


acetic (adj.)

1808, from French ac&eacute;tique pertaining to vinegar, from Latin acetum vinegar (properly vinum
acetum wine turned sour; see vinegar), originally past participle of acere be sour, related to acer
sharp (see acrid).


sauerkraut (n.)

1630s, from German Sauerkraut, literally sour cabbage, from sauer sour (from Proto-Germanic *sura-;
see sour (adj.)) + Kraut vegetable, cabbage, from Old High German krut, from Proto-Germanic
*kruthan.They pickle it [cabbage] up in all high Germany, with salt and barberies, and so keepe it
all the yeere, being commonly the first dish you have served in at table, which they call their
sawerkrant. [James Hart, Klinike, or the diet of the diseased, 1633]In U.S. slang, figurative use
for a German dates from 1858 (compare kraut). The effort to substitute liberty-cabbage for
sauerkraut, made by professional patriots in 1918, was a complete failure. [Mencken]. French
choucroute (19c.) is from Alsatian German surkrut (corresponding to German Sauerkraut), with folk
etymology alteration based on chou cabbage + cro&#251;te crust (n.).


acid (adj.)

1620s, of the taste of vinegar, from French acide (16c.) or directly from Latin acidus sour, sharp,
adjective of state from acere to be sour, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid). Figurative
use from 1775; applied to intense colors from 1916. Acid test is American English, 1892, from the
frontier days, when gold was distinguished from similar metals by application of nitric acid. Acid
rain is first recorded 1859 in reference to England.


vinegar (n.)

early 14c., from Old French vinaigre vinegar, from vin wine (from Latin vinum; see wine (n.)) +
aigre sour (see eager). In Latin, it was vinum acetum wine turned sour; compare Greek oxos wine
vinegar, which is related to oxys sharp (see acrid). Related: Vinegary; vinegarish.


cheese (n.1)

Old English cyse (West Saxon), cese (Anglian) cheese, from West Germanic *kasjus (cognates: Old
Saxon kasi, Old High German chasi, German K&auml;se, Middle Dutch case, Dutch kaas), from Latin
caseus cheese (source of Italian cacio, Spanish queso, Irish caise, Welsh caws).    Of unknown
origin; perhaps from a PIE root *kwat- to ferment, become sour (cognates: Prakrit chasi buttermilk;
Old Church Slavonic kvasu leaven; fermented drink, kyselu sour, -kyseti to turn sour; Czech kysati
to turn sour, rot; Sanskrit kvathati boils, seethes; Gothic hwa&thorn;jan foam). Also compare
fromage. Old Norse ostr, Danish ost, Swedish ost are related to Latin ius broth, sauce, juice.
Earliest references would be to compressed curds of milk used as food; pressed or molded cheeses
with rinds are 14c. Transferred to other cheese-like substances by 1530s. As a photographer's word
to make subjects hold a smile, it is attested from 1930, but in a reminiscence of schoolboy days,
which suggests an earlier use. Probably for the forced smile involved in making the -ee- sound.
Green cheese is that newly made; the notion that the moon is made of green cheese as a type of a
ridiculous assertion is from 1520s. To make cheeses was a schoolgirls' amusement (1835) of wheeling
rapidly so one's petticoats blew out in a circle then dropping down so they came to rest inflated
and resembling a wheel of cheese; hence, used figuratively for a deep curtsey.


flummery (n.)

1620s, a type of coagulated food, from Welsh llymru sour oatmeal jelly boiled with the husks, of
uncertain origin. Figurative use, of flattery, empty talk, is from 1740s.


stroganoff (n.)

a beef dish cooked in sauce containing sour cream, 1932, from French, from name of the prominent
Russian family, usually said to be for specifically in honor of diplomat Count Paul Stroganov
(1774-1817).


clementine (n.)

cross between tangerine and sour orange, 1926, from French cl&eacute;mentine (1902). Originally an
accidental hybrid said to have been discovered by (and named for) Father Clement Rodier in the
garden of his orphanage in Misserghin, near Oran, Algeria. Introduced into U.S. and grown at Citrus
Research Center in Riverside, Calif., as early as 1909.


crabby (adj.)

1520s, in now-obsolete sense crooked, gnarled, rough, from extended sense of crab (n.1) + -y (2).
Meaning disagreeable, sour, peevish is attested from 1776, American English. Both senses were found
earlier in crabbed.


wop (n.)

derogatory for Italian, 1912, American English slang, apparently from southern Italian dialect
guappo dandy, dude, stud, a greeting among male Neapolitans, said to be from Spanish guapo bold,
dandy, which is from Latin vappa sour wine, also worthless fellow; related to vapidus (see vapid).
It is probably <b>not an acronym</b>, and the usual story that it is one seems to date only to
c.1985.


frumpy (adj.)

1746, cross-tempered, from frump (n.) bad temper (1660s) and an earlier verb meaning to mock,
browbeat (1550s), of obscure origin, perhaps imitative of a sneer or derisive snort. Sense of sour-
looking, unfashionable is from 1825, but this may be a shortening of frumple to wrinkle, crumple
(late 14c.), from Middle Dutch verrompelen, from ver- completely + rompelen to rumple. Related:
Frumps. See also frump.


sur- (1)

word-forming element meaning over, above, beyond, in addition, especially in words from Anglo-French
and Old French, from Old French sour-, sor-, sur-, from Latin super (see super-).


lactic (adj.)

pertaining to milk, 1790 (in lactic acid; so called because it was obtained from sour milk), from
French lactique, from Latin lactis, genitive of lac milk (see lactation) + French -ique.


squeeze (v.)

c.1600, press forcibly (transitive), probably an alteration of quease (c.1550), from Old English
cwysan to squeeze, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative (compare German quetschen to squeeze).
Perhaps altered by influence of many words of similar sense in squ-. Intransitive sense from 1680s.
Baseball squeeze play first recorded 1905. The 1811 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue has squeeze-crab
A sour-looking, shrivelled, diminutive fellow.


austere (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French austere (Modern French aust&egrave;re) and directly from Latin austerus
dry, harsh, sour, tart, from Greek austeros bitter, harsh, especially making the tongue dry
(originally used of fruits, wines), metaphorically austere, harsh, from PIE *saus- dry (cognates:
Greek auos dry, auein to dry). Use in English is figurative: stern, severe, very simple. Related:
Austerely.


asperity (n.)

c.1200, asprete hardship, harshness of feelings, a figurative use, from Old French asperit&eacute;
difficulty, painful situation, harsh treatment (12c., Modern French &acirc;pret&eacute;), from Latin
asperitatem (nominative asperitas) roughness, from asper rough, harsh, of unknown origin; in Latin
used also of sour wine, bad weather, and hard times. Figurative meaning harshness of feeling in
English is attested from early 15c.


maraschino (n.)

1791, cherry liqueur, from Italian maraschino strong, sweet liqueur made from juice of the marasca
(a bitter black cherry), a shortening of amarasca, from amaro bitter, from Latin amarus sour, from
PIE root *om- raw, bitter. Maraschino cherry, one preserved in real or imitation maraschino, first
recorded 1820.


acerbity (n.)

1570s, from Middle French acerbit&eacute;, from Latin acerbitatem (nominative acerbitas) harshness,
sharpness, bitterness, from acerbus bitter to taste, sharp, sour, tart (related to acer sharp;
compare Latin superbus haughty, from super above), from Proto-Italic *akro-po- sharp, from PIE *ak-
sharp (see acrid). Earliest use in English is figurative, of sharp and bitter persons. Of tastes,
from 1610s.


harsh (adj.)

originally of texture, hairy, 1530s, probably from harske rough, coarse, sour (c.1300), a northern
word of Scandinavian origin (compare Danish and Norwegian harsk rancid, rank), related to Middle Low
German harsch rough, raw, German harst a rake; perhaps from PIE root *kars- to scrape, scratch, rub,
card (cognates: Lithuanian karsiu to comb, Old Church Slavonic krasta, Russian korosta to itch,
Latin carduus thistle, Sanskrit kasati rubs, scratches). Meaning offensive to feelings is from
1570s; disagreeable, rude from 1610s.


eager (adj.)

late 13c., strenuous, ardent, fierce, angry, from Old French aigre sour, acid; harsh, bitter, rough;
eager greedy; lively, active, forceful, from Latin acrem (nominative acer) keen, sharp, pointed,
piercing; acute, ardent, zealous (see acrid).    Meaning full of keen desire (early 14c.) seems to
be peculiar to English. The English word kept an alternative meaning of pungent, sharp-edged till
19c. (as in Shakespeare's The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, in Richard II). Related: Eagerly;
eagerness.


slow (adj.)

Old English slaw inactive, sluggish, torpid, lazy, also not clever, from Proto-Germanic
*sl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old Saxon sleu blunt, dull, Middle Dutch slee, Dutch sleeuw sour, tart,
blunt, Old High German sleo blunt, dull, Old Norse sljor, Danish sl&oslash;v, Swedish sl&ouml;
blunt, dull). Meaning taking a long time is attested from early 13c. Meaning dull, tedious is from
1841. As an adverb c.1500. The slows imaginary disease to account for lethargy is from 1843.


scurvy (n.)

1560s, noun use of adjective scurvy covered with scabs, diseased, scorbutic (early 15c.), variant of
scurfy. It took on the narrower meaning of Dutch scheurbuik, French scorbut scurvy, in reference to
the disease characterized by swollen and bleeding gums, prostration, etc., perhaps from Old Norse
skyrbjugr, which is perhaps literally a swelling (bjugr) from drinking sour milk (skyr) on long sea
voyages; but OED has alternative etymology of Middle Dutch or Middle Low German origin, as disease
that lacerates the belly, from schoren to lacerate + Middle Low German buk, Dutch buik belly.


whiskey (n.)

1715, from Gaelic uisge beatha whisky, literally water of life, from Old Irish uisce water (from PIE
*ud-skio-, from root *wed- (1) water, wet; see water (n.1)) + bethu life (from PIE *gwi-wo-tut-,
suffixed form of *gwi-wo-, from root *gweie- (1) to live; see bio-).    According to Barnhart, the
Gaelic is probably a loan-translation of Medieval Latin aqua vitae, which had been applied to
intoxicating drinks since early 14c. (compare French eau de vie brandy). Other early spellings in
English include usquebea (1706) and iskie bae (1580s). In Ireland and Scotland obtained from malt;
in the U.S. commonly made from corn or rye. Spelling distinction between Scotch whisky and Irish and
American whiskey is a 19c. innovation. Whisky sour is recorded from 1889.


wrong (adj.)

late Old English, twisted, crooked, wry, from Old Norse rangr, earlier *wrangr crooked, wry, wrong,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang- (cognates: Danish vrang crooked, wrong, Middle Dutch wranc, Dutch wrang
sour, bitter, literally that which distorts the mouth), from PIE *wrengh-, variant of *wergh- to
turn (see wring).    Sense of not right, bad, immoral, unjust developed by c.1300. Wrong thus is
etymologically a negative of right (adj.1), which is from Latin rectus, literally straight. Latin
pravus was literally crooked, but most commonly wrong, bad; and other words for crooked also have
meant wrong in Italian and Slavic. Compare French tort wrong, injustice, from Latin tortus twisted.
As an adverb from c.1200. Wrong-headed first recorded 1732. To get up on the wrong side (of the bed)
be in a bad mood is recorded from 1801, according to OED, from its supposed influence on one's
temper; it appears in Halliwell's Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words in 1846, but doesn't
seem to have been used much generally before late 1870s. To be on the wrong side of a given age,
older than, is from 1660s. Wrong side of the road (that reservbed for oncoming traffic) is by 1838.
To be from (or on) the wrong side of the tracks from the poor part of town is from 1921, American
English.


sweet (adj.)

Old English swete pleasing to the senses, mind or feelings; having a pleasant disposition, from
Proto-Germanic *swotja- (cognates: Old Saxon swoti, Old Frisian swet, Swedish s&ouml;t, Danish
s&oslash;d, Middle Dutch soete, Dutch zoet, Old High German swuozi, German s&uuml;&szlig;), from PIE
root *swad- sweet, pleasant (Sanskrit svadus sweet; Greek hedys sweet, pleasant, agreeable, hedone
pleasure; Latin suavis pleasant (not especially of taste), suadere to advise, properly to make
something pleasant to). Words for sweet in Indo-European languages typically are used for other
sense as well and in general for pleasing.    Then come kiss me, sweet-and-twenty!   Youth's a stuff
will not endure.  [Twelfth Night]     Also being in a sound or wholesome state (mid-13c.), and, of
water, fresh, not salt (late Old English). As an intensifier from 1958. Sweet in bed (c.1300) was
the equivalent of modern good in bed. To be sweet on someone is first recorded 1690s. Sweet sixteen
first recorded 1767. Sweet dreams as a parting to one going to sleep is attested from 1898, short
for sweet dreams to you, etc. Sweet-and-sour in cookery is from 1723 and not originally of oriental
food. Sweet nothings sentimental trivialities is from 1900. Sweet spot is from 1976, first in
reference to tennis rackets. Sweet corn is from 1640s.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


