sovereignty (n.)

mid-14c., pre-eminence, from Anglo-French sovereynete, Old French souverainete, from soverain (see
sovereign (adj.)). Meaning authority, rule, supremacy of power or rank is recorded from late 14c.;
sense of existence as an independent state is from 1715.


condominium (n.)

c.1714, joint rule or sovereignty, from Modern Latin condominium joint sovereignty, apparently
coined in German c.1700 from Latin com- together (see com-) + dominum right of ownership (see
domain). A word in politics and international law until sense of privately owned apartment arose in
American English 1962 as a special use of the legal term.


abdication (n.)

1550s, a disowning, from Latin abdicationem (nominative abdicatio) renunciation, abdication, noun of
action from past participle stem of abdicare (see abdicate); sense of resignation of sovereignty is
from 1680s.


autarchy (n.)

1660s, absolute sovereignty, from Greek autarkhia, from autarkhein to be an absolute ruler, from
autos self (see auto-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


principality (n.)

c.1300, position of a prince, from Old French principalite principal matter; power, sovereignty
(12c., Modern French principaut&eacute;), from Late Latin principalitatem (nominative
principalitas), from principalis (see principal (adj.)). Meaning region or state ruled by a prince
is attested from c.1400.


dynasty (n.)

mid-15c. (earlier dynastia, late 14c.), from Middle French dynastie and directly from Late Latin
dynastia, from Greek dynasteia power, lordship, sovereignty, from dynastes ruler, chief, from
dynasthai have power.


recognition (n.)

mid-15c., knowledge of an event or incident; understanding, from Middle French recognition (15c.)
and directly from Latin recognitionem (nominative recognitio) a reviewing, investigation,
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of recognoscere to acknowledge, know again;
examine (see recognize).    Sense of formal avowal of knowledge and approval is from 1590s;
especially acknowledgement of the independence of a country by a state formerly exercising
sovereignty (1824). Meaning a knowing again is from 1798.


monarchy (n.)

state ruled by monarchical government, mid-14c.; rule by one person, late 14c.; from Old French
monarchie sovereignty, absolute power (13c.), from Late Latin monarchia, from Greek monarkhia
absolute rule, literally ruling of one, from monos alone (see mono-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


hegemony (n.)

1560s, from Greek hegemonia leadership, a leading the way, a going first; also the authority or
sovereignty of one city-state over a number of others, as Athens in Attica, Thebes in Boeotia; from
hegemon leader, from hegeisthai to lead, perhaps originally to track down, from PIE *sag-eyo-, from
root *sag- to seek out, track down, trace (see seek). Originally of predominance of one city state
or another in Greek history; in reference to modern situations from 1860, at first of Prussia in
relation to other German states.


revolution (n.)

late 14c., originally of celestial bodies, from Old French revolucion course, revolution (of
celestial bodies) (13c.), or directly from Late Latin revolutionem (nominative revolutio) a
revolving, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin revolvere turn, roll back (see
revolve).    General sense of instance of great change in affairs is recorded from mid-15c.
Political meaning overthrow of an established political system first recorded c.1600, derived from
French, and was especially applied to the expulsion of the Stuart dynasty under James II in 1688 and
transfer of sovereignty to William and Mary.


