sovereign (n.)

late 13c., superior, ruler, master, from Old French soverain sovereign, lord, ruler, noun use of
adjective meaning highest, supreme, chief (see sovereign (adj.)). Meaning gold coin worth 22s 6d
first recorded late 15c.; value changed 1817 to 1 pound.


sovereignty (n.)

mid-14c., pre-eminence, from Anglo-French sovereynete, Old French souverainete, from soverain (see
sovereign (adj.)). Meaning authority, rule, supremacy of power or rank is recorded from late 14c.;
sense of existence as an independent state is from 1715.


sovereign (adj.)

early 14c., great, superior, supreme, from Old French soverain highest, supreme, chief, from Vulgar
Latin *superanus chief, principal (source also of Spanish soberano, Italian soprano), from Latin
super over (see super-). Spelling influenced by folk-etymology association with reign. Milton
spelled it sovran, as though from Italian sovrano. Of remedies or medicines, potent in a high
degree, from late 14c.


suzerain (n.)

sovereign, ruler, 1807, from French suzerain (14c., Old French suserain), noun use of adjective
meaning sovereign but not supreme, from adverb sus up, above, on analogy of soverain (see sovereign
(adj.)). Old French sus is from Vulgar Latin susum, from Latin sursum upward, above, contraction of
subversum, from subvertere (see subvert).


royalty (n.)

c.1400, office or position of a sovereign, also magnificence, from or modeled on Old French roialte
(12c., Modern French royaut&#233;), from Vulgar Latin *regalitatem (nominative *regalitas), from
Latin regalis (see royal). Sense of prerogatives or rights granted by a sovereign to an individual
or corporation is from late 15c. From that evolved more general senses, such as payment to a
landowner for use of a mine (1839), and ultimately payment to an author, composer, etc. for sale or
use of his or her work (1857). Compare realty.


court (n.)

late 12c., from Old French cort (11c., Modern French cour) king's court, princely residence, from
Latin cortem, accusative of cors (earlier cohors) enclosed yard, and by extension (and perhaps by
association with curia sovereign's assembly), those assembled in the yard; company, cohort, from
com- together (see com-) + stem hort- related to hortus garden, plot of ground (see yard (n.1)).
Sporting sense is from 1510s, originally of tennis. Legal meaning is from late 13c. (early
assemblies for justice were overseen by the sovereign personally).


Ra

hawk-headed sovereign sun god of Egyptian mythology, from Egyptian R' sun, day.


underling (n.)

late Old English, one who owes allegiance to a sovereign or ruler, from under + diminutive suffix
-ling.


tributary (n.)

late 14c., person, country, etc. owing obedience or paying tribute or a tax to a sovereign or
another people, from Latin tributarius (see tributary (adj.)). Meaning stream that flows into a
larger body is from 1822, from the adjective in this sense, which is recorded from 1610s.


khan (n.)

c.1400, from Turkic, literally lord, prince, contraction of khaqan ruler, sovereign. Known in Europe
since 13c.; compare Medieval Latin chanis, Greek kanes, Old French chan.


lese-majesty (n.)

offense against sovereign authority, treason, 1530s (mid-15c. as an Anglo-French word), from French
l&egrave;se-majest&eacute;, from Latin laesa majestos violated majesty, from laesus, past participle
of laedere to hurt, injure, damage, offend, insult, of unknown origin.


disloyalty (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French desloyaulte, from Old French desloiaute, desleaut&eacute; disloyalty,
faithlessness, marital infidelity, from desloial (see disloyal). Especially of allegiance to a state
or sovereign since c.1600.


infidelity (n.)

c.1400, want of faith, unbelief in religion; false belief, paganism; also (early 15c.)
unfaithfulness or disloyalty to a person (originally to a sovereign, by 16c. to a lover or spouse),
from French infid&eacute;lit&eacute;, from Latin infidelitatem (nominative infidelitas)
unfaithfulness, faithlessness, noun of quality from infidelis (see infidel).


tax (n.)

early 14c., obligatory contribution levied by a sovereign or government, from Anglo-French tax, Old
French taxe, and directly from Medieval Latin taxa, from Latin taxare (see tax (v.)). Related:
Taxes. Tax-deduction is from 1942; tax-shelter is attested from 1961.


traitor (n.)

c.1200, one who betrays a trust or duty, from Old French traitor, traitre traitor, villain, deceiver
(11c., Modern French tra&#238;tre), from Latin traditor betrayer, literally one who delivers, agent
noun from stem of tradere deliver, surrender (see tradition). Originally usually with a suggestion
of Judas Iscariot; especially of one false to his allegiance to a sovereign, government, or cause
from late 15c.


canton (n.)

1530s, corner, angle, from Middle French canton piece, portion of a country (13c.), from Italian
(Lombard dialect) cantone region, especially in the mountains, augmentative of Latin canto section
of a country, literally corner (see cant (n.2)). Originally in English a term in heraldry and flag
descriptions; applied to the sovereign states of the Swiss republic from 1610s. Related: Cantoned.


viceroy (n.)

person ruling as representative of a sovereign, 1520s, from Middle French vice-roy, from Old French
vice- deputy (see vice-) + roi king, from Latin regem (nominative rex); see rex. The species of
American butterfly so called from 1881.


regent (n.)

one who rules during the minority or absence of a sovereign, c.1400, from the adjective (now
archaic, attested in English late 14c.), from Old French regent and directly from Medieval Latin
regentem (nominative regens), from Latin regens ruler, governor, noun use of present participle of
regere to rule, direct (see regal). Senses of university faculty member is attested from mid-15c.,
originally Scottish.


reign (v.)

to hold or exercise sovereign power, late 13c., from Old French regner rule, reign (12c.), from
Latin regnare have royal power, be king, rule, reign, from regnum (see reign (n.)). Related:
Reigned; reigning; regnal.


dominion (n.)

early 15c., from Old French dominion dominion, rule, power, from Medieval Latin dominionem
(nominative dominio), corresponding to Latin dominium property, ownership, from dominus (see
domination).    British sovereign colonies often were called dominions, hence the Dominion of
Canada, the formal title after the 1867 union, and Old Dominion, the popular name for the U.S. state
of Virginia, first recorded 1778.


foreign (adj.)

mid-13c., ferren, foreyne out of doors, from Old French forain strange, foreign; outer, external,
outdoor; remote, out-of-the-way (12c.), from Medieval Latin foranus on the outside, exterior, from
Latin foris outside, literally out of doors, related to for1s door, from PIE *dhwor-ans-, from root
*dhwer- door, doorway (see door). Spelling altered 17c. perhaps by influence of reign, sovereign.
Replaced native fremd. Sense of not in one's own land is first attested late 14c.


bounty (n.)

mid-13c., generosity, from Old French bonte goodness (12c., Modern French bont&eacute;), from Latin
bonitatem (nominative bonitas) goodness, from bonus good (see bene-). Sense of gift bestowed by a
sovereign or the state led to extended senses of gratuity to a military recruit (1702) and reward
for killing or taking a criminal or enemy (1764).I do ... promise, that there shall be paid ... the
following several and respective premiums and Bounties for the prisoners and Scalps of the Enemy
Indians that shall be taken or killed .... [Papers of the Governor of Pennsylvania, 1764]


duke (n.)

early 12c., sovereign prince, from Old French duc (12c.) and directly from Latin dux (genitive
ducis) leader, commander, in Late Latin governor of a province, from ducere to lead, from PIE *deuk-
to lead (cognates: Old English togian to pull, drag, Old High German ziohan to pull, Old English
togian to draw, drag, Middle Welsh dygaf I draw).    Applied in English to nobleman of the highest
rank probably first mid-14c., ousting native earl. Also used to translate various European titles
(such as Russian knyaz).


throne (n.)

c.1200, trone, the seat of God or a saint in heaven; c.1300 as seat occupied by a sovereign, from
Old French trone (12c., Modern French tr&#244;ne), from Latin thronus, from Greek thronos elevated
seat, chair, throne, from PIE root *dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (cognates: Latin firmus firm,
steadfast, strong, stable, Sanskrit dharma statute, law; see firm (adj.)). From late 14c. as a
symbol of royal power. Colloquial meaning toilet is recorded from 1922. The classical -h- begins to
appear in English from late 14c.


prince (n.)

c.1200, ruler of a principality (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French prince prince, noble lord
(12c.), from Latin princeps (genitive principis) first man, chief leader; ruler, sovereign, noun use
of adjective meaning that takes first, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + root of capere to take
(see capable). German cognate f&uuml;rst, from Old High German furist first, is apparently an
imitation of the Latin formation. Colloquial meaning admirable or generous person is from 1911,
American English. Prince Regent was the title of George, Prince of Wales (later George VI) during
the mental incapacity of George III (1811-1820).


treason (n.)

c.1200, betraying; betrayal of trust; breech of faith, from Anglo-French treson, from Old French
traison treason, treachery (11c.; Modern French trahison), from Latin traditionem (nominative
traditio) a handing over, delivery, surrender (see tradition). Old French form influenced by the
verb trair betray. In old English law, high treason is violation by a subject of his allegiance to
his sovereign or to the state; distinguished from petit treason, treason against a subject, such as
murder of a master by his servant. Constructive treason was a judicial fiction whereby actions
carried out without treasonable intent, but found to have the effect of treason, were punished as
though they were treason itself. The protection against this accounts for the careful wording of the
definition of treason in the U.S. Constitution.


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


