space (adj.)

c.1600, from space (n.). Meaning having to do with outer space is from 1894.


space (v.)

1540s, to make of a certain extent; 1680s in typography; 1703 as to arrange at set intervals, from
space (n.). Meaning to be in a state of drug-induced euphoria is recorded from 1968. Space cadet
eccentric person disconnected with reality (often implying an intimacy with hallucinogenic drugs) is
a 1960s phrase, probably traceable to 1950s U.S. sci-fi television program Tom Corbett, Space Cadet,
which was watched by many children who dreamed of growing up to be one and succeeded. Related:
Spaced; spacing.


space (n.)

c.1300, extent or area; room (to do something), a shortening of Old French espace period of time,
distance, interval (12c.), from Latin spatium room, area, distance, stretch of time, of unknown
origin (also source of Spanish espacio, Italian spazio).    From early 14c. as a place, also amount
or extent of time. From mid-14c. as distance, interval of space; from late 14c. as ground, land,
territory; extension in three dimensions; distance between two or more points. From early 15c. as
size, bulk, also an assigned position. Typographical sense is attested from 1670s (typewriter space-
bar is from 1876, earlier space-key, 1860).    Astronomical sense of stellar depths apparently is
first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, common from 1890s. Space age is attested from 1946. Many
compounds first appeared in science fiction and speculative writing, such as spaceship (1894, A
Journey in Other Worlds, John Jacob Astor); spacecraft (1928, Popular Science); space travel (1931);
space station (1936, Rockets Through Space); spaceman (1942, Thrilling Wonder Stories). Space race
attested from 1959. Space shuttle attested by 1970.    Space isn't remote at all. It's only an
hour's drive away if your car could go straight upwards. [Sir Fred Hoyle, London Observer, 1979]


spacewalk (n.)

also space-walk, 1965, from space (n.) + walk (n.).


spacesuit (n.)

also space-suit, 1920, from space (n.) + suit (n.).


spacer (n.)

typewriter mechanism and key, 1882, agent noun from space (v.).


spaceman (n.)

1942 in the astronaut sense, from space (n.) + man (n.). Earlier it meant journalist paid by the
length of his copy (1892). Spacewoman recorded from 1960.


spacecraft (n.)

1928, from space (n.) + craft (n.).


spaceship (n.)

1894, from space (n.) + ship (n.). Spaceship earth is from 1966.


NASA

U.S. space agency, acronym of National Aeronautics and Space Administration, set up in 1958.


void (n.)

1610s, unfilled space, gap, from void (adj.). Meaning absolute empty space, vacuum is from 1727.


spatial (adj.)

1840 (spacial is from 1838), occupying space, from Latin spatium + adjectival suffix -al (1); formed
in English as an adjective to space (n.), to go with temporal. Meaning of or relating to space is
from 1857. Related: Spatially.


spacy (adj.)

also spacey, 1852, large, roomy, spacious, from space (n.) + -y (2). Meaning felt as characteristic
of outer space (especially with reference to electronic music) is attested from 1971, probably
influenced by spaced-out (1965, American English slang), a reference to the behavior of people using
hallucinogenic drugs (see space (v.)).


backspace (adj.)

also back-space, 1899, in reference to keyboarding, from back (adv.) + space.    We have had the
pleasure of examining one of the 1899 model Hammond typewriters, with the new back-space key. This
new feature is certainly an improvement in the machine. [The Phonetic Journal, March 11, 1899]


room (n.)

Old English rum space (extent or time); scope, opportunity, from Proto-Germanic *ruman (cognates:
Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic rum, German Raum space, Dutch ruim hold of a ship,
nave), nouns formed from Germanic adjective *ruma- roomy, spacious, from PIE root *reue- (1) to
open; space (cognates: Avestan ravah- space, Latin rus open country, Old Irish roi, roe plain field,
Old Church Slavonic ravinu level, Russian ravnina a plain). Old English also had a frequent
adjective rum roomy, wide, long, spacious.    Original sense preserved in make room clear space for
oneself (late 14c.); meaning chamber, cabin first recorded early 14c. as a nautical term, and first
applied mid-15c. to chambers within houses. The Old English word for this was cofa, ancestor of
cove. Room-service is attested from 1913; room-temperature from 1879. Roomth sufficient space
(1530s) now is obsolete.


hyperspace (n.)

space of more than three dimensions, 1867, from hyper-  + space (n.). A hybrid; correctly formed it
would be superspace.


vacuity (n.)

late 14c., hollow space, from Latin vacuitas empty space, emptiness, absence, vacancy, freedom, from
vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)). Originally in anatomy. Meaning vacancy of mind or thought is
attested from 1590s.


plenum (n.)

1670s, filled space (opposite of vacuum), from Latin plenum (spatium) full (space), neuter of
adjective plenus complete, full (see plenary). The meaning of a full assembly of legislators is
first recorded 1772.


vacuum (n.)

1540s, emptiness of space, from Latin vacuum an empty space, vacant place, a void, noun use of
neuter of vacuus empty, unoccupied, devoid of, figuratively free, unoccupied, related to vacare be
empty (see vain). Properly a loan-translation of Greek kenon, literally that which is empty. Meaning
a space emptied of air is attested from 1650s. Vacuum tube glass thermionic device is attested from
1859. Vacuum cleaner is from 1903; shortened form vacuum (n.) first recorded 1910.    The
metaphysicians of Elea, Parmenides and Melissus, started the notion that a vacuum was impossible,
and this became a favorite doctrine with Aristotle. All the scholastics upheld the maxim that nature
abhors a vacuum. [Century Dictionary]


blank (n.)

late 14c. as the name of a small French coin; 1550s as white space in the center of a target, from
the same source as blank (adj.). Meaning empty space (in a document, etc.) is from c.1570. Meaning
losing lottery ticket (1560s) is behind the expression draw a blank. The word has been for decorum's
sake, substituted for a word of execration [OED] from 1854. From 1896 as short for blank cartridge
(itself from 1826).


area (n.)

1530s, vacant piece of ground, from Latin area level ground, open space, used of building sites,
playgrounds, threshing floors, etc.; of uncertain origin. Perhaps related to arere to become dry, on
notion of a burned clearing or dry, bare space. The generic sense of amount of surface (whether open
or not) contained within any set of limits is from 1845. Area code in North American telephone
systems is attested from 1959.


proscenium (n.)

c.1600, stage of an ancient theater, from Latin proscaenium, from Greek proskenion the space in
front of the scenery, also entrance of a tent, from pro in front (see pro-) + skene stage, tent,
booth (see scene). Modern sense of space between the curtain and the orchestra is attested from
1807.


always (adv.)

mid-14c., compound of Old English phrase ealne weg always, quite, perpetually, literally all the
way, with accusative of space or distance, though the oldest recorded usages refer to time; see all
+ way (n.). The adverbial genitive -s appeared early 13c. and is now the standard, though the
variant alway survived into 1800s. OED speculates allway was originally of space or distance, but
already in the oldest Eng. transferred to an extent of time.


frist (n.)

a space of time, Old English frist, first space of time (compare Old Frisian first, Old High German
frist, Old Norse frest). As a verb, meaning delay, from early 13c.


interval (n.)

early 14c., from Old French intervalle (14c.), earlier entreval (13c.), from Late Latin intervallum
space, interval, distance, originally space between palisades or ramparts, from inter between (see
inter-) + vallum rampart (see wall (n.)). Metaphoric sense of gap in time was present in Latin.


anchorite (n.)

mid-15c., hermit (especially those of the Eastern deserts), recluse, one who withdraws from the
world for religious reasons, from Medieval Latin anchorita, from Greek anakhoretes, literally one
who has retired, agent noun from anakhorein to retreat, go back, retire, from ana- back (see ana-) +
khorein withdraw, give place, from khoros place, space, free space, room. Replaced Old English
ancer, from Late Latin anchoreta.


spacious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French spacios, espacios roomy, spacious, extensive (12c., Modern French
spacieux), or directly from Latin spatiosus roomy, ample (Medieval Latin spaciosus), from spatium
room, space (see space (n.)). Related: Spaciously; spaciousness.


glade (n.)

clear, open space in a woods, c.1400, perhaps from Middle English glode (c.1300), from Old Norse
gla&eth;r bright (see glad). Original meaning would be bright (because open) space in a wood
(compare French clairi&egrave;re glade, from clair clear, bright; German Lichtung clearing, glade,
from Licht light). American English sense of marshy grassland (as in Everglades) first recorded
c.1796.


margin (n.)

mid-14c., edge of a sea or lake; late 14c., space between a block of text and the edge of a page,
from Latin marginem (nominative margo) edge, brink, border, margin, from PIE *merg- edge, border,
boundary (see mark (n.1)). General sense of boundary space; rim or edge of anything is from late
14c. Meaning comfort allowance, cushion is from 1851; margin of safety first recorded 1888. Stock
market sense of sum deposited with a broker to cover risk of loss is from 1848. Related: Margins.


while (n.)

Old English hwile, accusative of hwil a space of time, from Proto-Germanic *hwilo (cognates: Old
Saxon hwil, Old Frisian hwile, Old High German hwila, German Weile, Gothic hveila space of time,
while), originally rest (compare Old Norse hvila bed, hvild rest), from PIE *kwi-lo-, suffixed form
of root *kweie- (2) to rest (cognates: Avestan shaitish joy, Old Persian &#353;iyatish joy, Latin
quies rest, repose, quiet, Old Church Slavonic po-koji rest). Notion of period of rest became in
Germanic period of time.    Now largely superseded by time except in formulaic constructions (such
as all the while). Middle English sense of short space of time spent in doing something now only
preserved in worthwhile and phrases such as worth (one's) while. As a conjunction, during or in the
time that; as long as (late Old English), it represents Old English &thorn;a hwile &thorn;e,
literally the while that. Form whiles is recorded from early 13c.; whilst is from late 14c., with
excrescent -st as in amongst, amidst. Service while-you-wait is attested from 1911.


point-blank (n.)

1570s, said to be from point (v.) + blank (n.), here meaning the white center of a target. The
notion would be of standing close enough to aim (point) at the blank without allowance for curve,
windage, or gravity. But early references make no mention of a white target, and the phrase is
possibly from a simplification of the French phrase de pointe en blanc, used in French gunnery in
reference to firing a piece on the level into open space to test how far it will carry. In that case
the blank represents empty space or perhaps the zero point of elevation. The whole phrase might be a
French loan-translation from Italian. From 1590s as an adjective in English.


spacing (n.)

allowing and gauging of intervals between words in setting type, 1680s, verbal noun from space (v.).


Star Wars (n.)

name of a popular science fiction film released in 1977; also the informal name for a space-based
missile defense system proposed in 1983 by U.S. president Ronald Reagan.


camp (n.)

place where an army lodges temporarily, 1520s, from French camp, from Italian campo, from Latin
campus open field, level space (also source of French champ; see campus), especially open space for
military exercise.    A later reborrowing of the Latin word, which had been taken up in early West
Germanic as *kampo-z and appeared originally in Old English as camp contest, battle, fight, war.
This was obsolete by mid-15c. Transferred to non-military senses 1550s. Meaning body of adherents of
a doctrine or cause is 1871. Camp-follower first attested 1810. Camp-meeting is from 1809,
originally usually in reference to Methodists. Camp-fever (1758) is any epidemic fever incident to
life in a camp, especially typhus or typhoid.


shim (n.)

1723, a Kentish word of unknown origin. Originally a piece of iron fitted to a plow for scraping
soil; meaning thin slip of wood to fill up a space or raise a level is from 1860.


Hubble (n.)

space telescope placed in orbit 1990, named for U.S. astronomer Edwin P. Hubble (1889-1953).


remove (n.)

1550s, act of removing, from remove (v.). Sense of distance or space by which any thing is removed
from another is attested from 1620s.


place (n.)

c.1200, space, dimensional extent, room, area, from Old French place place, spot (12c.) and directly
from Medieval Latin placea place, spot, from Latin platea courtyard, open space; broad way, avenue,
from Greek plateia (hodos) broad (way), fem. of platys broad (see plaice).    Replaced Old English
stow and stede. From mid-13c. as particular part of space, extent, definite location, spot, site;
from early 14c. as position or place occupied by custom, etc.; position on some social scale; from
late 14c. as inhabited place, town, country, also place on the surface of something, portion of
something, part, also, office, post. Meaning group of houses in a town is from 1580s.    Also from
the same Latin source are Italian piazza, Catalan plassa, Spanish plaza, Middle Dutch plaetse, Dutch
plaats, German Platz, Danish plads, Norwegian plass. Wide application in English covers meanings
that in French require three words: place, lieu, and endroit. Cognate Italian piazza and Spanish
plaza retain more of the etymological sense.    To take place happen is from mid-15c. To know
(one's) place is from c.1600; hence figurative expression put (someone) in his or her place (1855).
Place of worship attested from 1689, originally in official papers and in reference to assemblies of
dissenters from the Church of England. All over the place in disorder is attested from 1923.


close (adv.)

tightly, with no opening or space between, from close (adj.).


ether (n.)

late 14c., upper regions of space, from Old French ether and directly from Latin aether the upper
pure, bright air, from Greek aither upper air; bright, purer air; the sky, from aithein to burn,
shine, from PIE root *aidh- to burn (see edifice).    In ancient cosmology, the element that filled
all space beyond the sphere of the moon, constituting the substance of the stars and planets.
Conceived of as a purer form of fire or air, or as a fifth element. From 17c.-19c., it was the
scientific word for an assumed frame of reference for forces in the universe, perhaps without
material properties. The concept was shaken by the Michelson-Morley experiment (1887) and discarded
after the Theory of Relativity won acceptance, but before it went it gave rise to the colloquial use
of ether for the radio (1899).    The name also was bestowed c.1730 (Frobenius; in English by 1757)
on a volatile chemical compound known since 14c. for its lightness and lack of color (its anesthetic
properties weren't fully established until 1842).


de

Latin adverb and preposition of separation in space, meaning down from, off, away from, and
figuratively concerning, by reason of, according to; from PIE demonstrative stem *de- (see to).


leeway (n.)

1660s, sideways drift of a ship caused by wind, from lee + way (n.). Figurative meaning extra space
is by 1835.


cyclorama (n.)

picture of a landscape on the interior surface of a cylindrical space, 1840, from cyclo- + -rama
spectacle.


Skylab (n.)

name of a U.S. space program, first attested 1970, launched 1973, fell to earth 1979. From sky (n.)
+ lab (n.).


hyperdrive (n.)

by 1955, an invented word of science fiction writers to describe anything that can power a space
craft faster than the speed of light. See hyper- + drive (n.).


breve (n.)

mid-15c., musical notation indicating two whole notes, from Latin breve (adj.) short in space or
time (see brief (adj.)). The grammatical curved line placed over a vowel to indicate shortness
(1540s) is from the same source.


ecosphere (n.)

1953, the region around a star where conditions allow life-bearing planets to exist; see eco- +
sphere. Apparently coined by German-born U.S. physician and space medicine pioneer Hubertus
Strughold (1898-1986).


close (n.)

late 14c., act of closing, conclusion, termination, from close (v.). Also in early use enclosure,
enclosed space (late 13c.), from Old French clos, noun use of past participle.


occupancy (n.)

1590s, condition of being an occupant; from occupant + -cy. Meaning fact of occupying is from 1833;
that of proportion of available space that is occupied is attested by 1974.


quickly (adv.)

late Old English cwiculice vigorously, keenly; see quick (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning rapidly, in a
short space of time is from c.1200.


