spatula (n.)

1520s (from early 15c. as a type of medical instrument), from Latin spatula broad piece, spatula,
diminutive of spatha broad, flat tool or weapon, from Greek spathe broad flat blade (used by
weavers) (see spade (n.1)). Erroneous form spattular is attested from c.1600.


spatulate (adj.)

1760, from Modern Latin spatulatus, from spatula (see spatula).


espalier (n.)

1660s, from French espalier (16c.), from Italian spalliera stake-works shoulder-high, from spalla
shoulder, from Latin spatula (see spatula).


epaulet (n.)

1783, from French &eacute;paulette (16c.), diminutive of &eacute;paule shoulder, from Old French
espaule (12c.), from Latin spatula flat piece of wood, splint, later shoulder blade, diminutive of
spatha broad wooden instrument, broad sword, from Greek spathe a broad flat sword (see spade (n.1)).


float (n.)

early 12c., state of floating (Old English flot meant body of water), from float (v.). Meaning
platform on wheels used for displays in parades, etc. is from 1888, probably from earlier sense of
flat-bottomed boat (1550s). As a type of fountain drink, by 1915.   <b>Float</b>.--An ade upon the
top of which is floated a layer of grape juice, ginger ale, or in some cases a disher of fruit
sherbet or ice cream. In the latter case it would be known as a sherbet float or an ice-cream float.
[The Dispenser's Formulary: Or, Soda Water Guide, New York, 1915]   <hr />   Few soda water
dispensers know what is meant by a Float Ice Cream Soda. This is not strange since the term is a
coined one. By a float ice cream soda is meant a soda with the ice cream floating on top, thus
making a most inviting appearance and impressing the customer that you are liberal with your ice
cream, when you are not really giving any more than the fellow that mixes his ice cream out of
sight. [The Spatula, Boston, July, 1908]


spoon (n.)

Old English spon chip, sliver, shaving, splinter of wood, from Proto-Germanic *spe-nu- (cognates:
Old Norse spann, sponn chip, splinter, Swedish sp&#229;n a wooden spoon, Old Frisian spon, Middle
Dutch spaen, Dutch spaan, Old High German span, German Span chip, splinter), from PIE *spe- (2)
long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe spade, also possibly Greek sphen wedge).    As the
word for a type of eating utensil, c.1300 in English (in Old English such a thing might be a
metesticca), in this sense supposed to be from Old Norse sponn, which meant spoon as well as chip,
tile. The eating utensil sense is specific to Middle English and Scandinavian, though Middle Low
German spon also meant wooden spatula. To be born with a silver spoon in one's mouth is from at
least 1719 (Goldsmith, 1765, has: one man is born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another with
a wooden ladle).


