spawn (n.)

late 15c., fish eggs, from spawn (v.); figurative sense of brood, offspring, and, insultingly, of
persons, is from 1580s.


spawn (v.)

c.1400, intransitive, from Anglo-French espaundre, Old French espandre to spread out, pour out,
scatter, strew, spawn (of fish) (Modern French &#233;pandre), from Latin expandere (see expand). The
notion is of a spreading out of fish eggs released in water. The transitive meaning to engender,
give rise to is attested from 1590s. Related: Spawned; spawning.


spat (n.3)

spawn of a shellfish, especially spawn of an oyster, also a young oyster, 1660s, of unknown origin,
perhaps from the past tense of spit (v.1).


fry (n.)

young fish, late 13c., from Anglo-French frei, from Old French frai spawn, from froier to rub, spawn
(by rubbing abdomen on sand). First applied to human offspring 14c. in Scottish, though OED and some
other sources trace this usage to Old Norse frjo, fr&aelig; seed, offspring.


roe (n.1)

fish eggs, mid-15c., probably from an unrecorded Old English *hrogn, from Proto-Germanic *khrugna
(cognates: Old Norse hrogn, Danish rogn, Swedish rom, Flemish rog, Middle Low German and Middle
Dutch roge, Old High German rogo, German Rogen roe), from PIE *krek- frog spawn, fish eggs
(cognates: Lithuanian kurkle, Russian krjak spawn of frogs). Exact relations of the Germanic words
are uncertain.


shotten (adj.)

having shot its spawn, and accordingly of inferior value, mid-15c., past participle adjective from
shoot (v.). Originally of fish; applied to persons, with sense of exhausted by sickness, from 1590s.


anadromous (adj.)

of fish, ascending a river to spawn (as salmon do), 1753, from Latinized form of Greek anadromos
running upward, from ana up, back (see ana-) + dramein to run (see dromedary).


mackerel (n.)

edible fish, c.1300, from Old French maquerel mackerel (Modern French maquereau), of unknown origin
but apparently identical with Old French maquerel pimp, procurer, broker, agent, intermediary, a
word from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch makelaer broker, from Old Frisian mek marriage,
from maken to make). The connection is obscure, but medieval people had imaginative notions about
the erotic habits of beasts. The fish approach the shore in shoals in summertime to spawn.
Exclamation holy mackerel is attested from 1876.


