grandstand (n.)

main seating for spectators at an outdoor event, 1761 (two words), from grand (adj.) + stand (n.).
The verb meaning to show off is student slang from 1895, from grandstand player, attested in
baseball slang from 1888.It's little things of this sort which makes the 'grand stand player.' They
make impossible catches, and when they get the ball they roll all over the field. [M.J. Kelly, Play
Ball, 1888]  Compare British gallery hit (1882) showy play by a batsman in cricket, 'intended to
gain applause from uncritical spectators' [OED]. Related: grandstanding.


bleacher (n.)

1540s, one who bleaches, agent noun from bleach (v.). The bench for spectators at a sports field
sense (usually bleachers) is attested since 1889, American English; so named because the boards were
bleached by the sun.


cage (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cage cage, prison; retreat, hideout (12c.), from Latin cavea hollow
place, enclosure for animals, coop, hive, stall, dungeon, spectators' seats in the theater (source
also of Italian gabbia basket for fowls, coop; see cave (n.)).


arbiter (n.)

late 14c., from Old French arbitre or directly from Latin arbiter one who goes somewhere (as witness
or judge), in classical Latin used of spectators and eye-witnesses, in law, he who hears and decides
a case, a judge, umpire, mediator; from ad- to (see ad-) + baetere to come, go. The specific sense
of one chosen by two disputing parties to decide the matter is from 1540s. The earliest form of the
word attested in English is the fem. noun arbitress (mid-14c.) a woman who settles disputes.


Stephen

masc. proper name, from Latin Stephanus, from Greek Stephanos, from stephanos crown, wreath,
garland, chaplet; crown of victory, hence victory, prize, honor, glory, properly that which
surrounds; also used of the ring of spectators around a fight or the wall of a town, from stephein
to encircle, crown, wreathe, tie around, from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; place firmly on, fasten
(see step (v.)). Exclusively a monk's name in Old English, it became common after the Conquest.
Saint Stephen, stoned to death, was said to be Christianity's first martyr.


amphitheater (n.)

late 14c., from Latin amphitheatrum, from Greek amphitheatron double theater, amphitheater, neuter
of amphitheatros with spectators all around, from amphi- on both sides (see amphi-) + theatron
theater (see theater). Classical theaters were semi-circles, thus two together made an amphi-
theater.


fence (n.)

early 14c., action of defending, resistance; means of protection, fortification, shortening of
defens (see defense). The same pattern also yielded fend, fender; and obsolete fensive defensive
(late 16c.). Spelling alternated between -c- and -s- in Middle English. Sense of enclosure is first
recorded mid-15c. on notion of that which serves as a defense. Sense of dealer in stolen goods is
thieves' slang, first attested c. 1700, from notion of such transactions taking place under defense
of secrecy.    To be figuratively on the fence uncommitted is from 1828, perhaps from the notion of
spectators at a fight, or a simple literal image: A man sitting on the top of a fence, can jump down
on either side with equal facility. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].


stand (n.)

Old English stand a pause, delay, state of rest or inaction, from the root of stand (v.). Compare
Dutch and German stand (n.). Sense of action of standing or coming to a position is attested from
late 14c., especially in reference to fighting (1590s). Sense of state of being unable to proceed is
from 1590s.    Meaning place of standing, position is from early 14c.; figurative sense is from
1590s. Meaning raised platform for a hunter or sportsman is attested from c. 1400. Meaning raised
platform for spectators at an open-air event is from 1610s; meaning piece of furniture on which
something is to be set is from 1690s. Sense of stall or booth is first recorded c. 1500. Military
meaning complete set (of arms, colors, etc.) is from 1721, often a collective singular. Sense of
standing growth (usually of of trees) is 1868, American English. Theatrical sense of each stop made
on a performance tour is from 1896. The word formerly also was slang for an erection (1867).


theater (n.)

late 14c., open air place in ancient times for viewing spectacles and plays, from Old French theatre
(12c., Modern French th&#233;&#226;tre, improperly accented) and directly from Latin theatrum play-
house, theater; stage; spectators in a theater (source also of Spanish, Italian teatro), from Greek
theatron theater; the people in the theater; a show, a spectacle, literally place for viewing, from
theasthai to behold (related to thea a view, a seeing; a seat in the theater, theates spectator) +
-tron, suffix denoting place.    Meaning building where plays are shown is from 1570s in English.
Transferred sense of plays, writing, production, the stage is from 1660s. Generic sense of place of
action is from 1580s; especially region where war is being fought (1914). Spelling with -re arose
late 17c. and prevailed in Britain after c. 1700 by French influence, but American English retained
or revived the older spelling in -er.


