speck (n.)

Old English specca small spot, stain, of unknown origin; probably related to Dutch speckel speck,
speckle, Middle Dutch spekelen to sprinkle (compare speckle (v.)). Meaning tiny bit developed
c.1400. As a verb, 1570s, from the noun. Related: Specked.


speckle (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in speckled), probably related to Old English specca small spot, speck (see speck)
or from a related Middle Dutch or Middle High German word. Related: Speckled; speckling. The noun is
first attested mid-15c.


spot (n.)

c.1200, moral stain, probably from Old English splott a spot, blot, patch (of land), and partly from
or related to Middle Dutch spotte spot, speck. Other cognates are East Frisian spot speck, North
Frisian spot speck, piece of ground, Old Norse spotti small piece, Norwegian spot spot, small piece
of land. It is likely that some of these are borrowed from others, but the exact evolution now is
impossible to trace.    Meaning speck, stain is from mid-14c. The sense of particular place, small
extent of space is from c.1300. Meaning short interval in a broadcast for an advertisement or
announcement is from 1923. Proceeded by a number (as in five-spot) it originally was a term for
prison sentence of that many years (1901, American English slang). To put (someone) on the spot
place in a difficult situation is from 1928. Colloquial phrase to hit the spot satisfy, be what is
required is from 1868. Spot check first attested 1933. Adverbial phrase spot on completely right
attested from 1920.


mote (n.)

particle of dust, Old English mot, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Dutch mot dust from turf,
sawdust, grit, Norwegian mutt speck, mote, splinter, chip. Many references are to Matt. vii:3.


motley (adj.)

late 14c., parti-colored (originally of fabric), from Anglo-French motteley, probably from Old
English mot speck (see mote). But Klein's sources say probably from Gaulish. Diversified in color,
especially of a fool's dress. Hence, allusively, a fool (1600). As a noun meaning cloth of mixed
color from late 14c.


maquette (n.)

artist's preliminary model or sketch, 1903, from French maquette (18c.), from Italian macchietta
speck, diminutive of macchia spot, from macchiare to stain, from Latin maculare (see maculate). From
1893 as a French word in English.


sprinkle (v.)

late 14c. (implied in sprinkled), frequentative of sprenge (see spring (v.)) or via Middle Dutch,
Middle Low German sprenkel spot, speck, from PIE root *(s)preg- to jerk, scatter (cognates: Latin
spargere to scatter, sprinkle). The meaning rain lightly is first recorded 1778.


wall-eyed (adj.)

c.1300, wawil-eghed, wolden-eiged, having very light-colored eyes, also having parti-colored eyes,
from Old Norse vagl-eygr having speckled eyes, from vagl speck in the eye; beam, upper cross-beam,
from Proto-Germanic *walgaz. Meaning having one or both eyes turned out (and thus showing much
white) is first recorded 1580s.


scintilla (n.)

1690s, spark, glimmer, hence least particle, trace, from figurative use of Latin scintilla particle
of fire, spark, glittering speck, atom, probably from PIE *ski-nto-, from root *skai- to shine, to
gleam (cognates: Gothic skeinan, Old English scinan to shine; see shine (v.)).


dot (n.)

Old English dott speck, head of a boil, perhaps related to Norwegian dot lump, small knot, Dutch dot
knot, small bunch, wisp, Old High German tutta nipple; ultimate origin unclear.    Known from a
single source c.1000; the word reappeared with modern meaning mark c.1530; not common until 18c.
Morse telegraph sense is from 1838. On the dot punctual is 1909, in reference to a clock dial face.
Dot-matrix first attested 1975.


