speechless (adj.)

Old English sp&aelig;cleas permanently mute; see speech + -less. Meaning mute by effect of
astonishment is from late 14c. Related: Speechlessly; speechlessness.


clumsy (adj.)

1590s, acting as if benumbed, alteration of Middle English clumsid numb with cold (14c.), past
participle of clumsen to benumb, stiffen or paralyze with cold or fear, from a Scandinavian source
akin to Old Norse klumsa make speechless, palsy; prevent from speaking, intensive of kluma to make
motionless. For insertion of -s-, see flimsy.    Not in general use until 18c., with senses
manifesting awkwardness; so made as to be unwieldy. Related: Clumsily; clumsiness. Compare Swedish
dialectal klummsen benumbed with cold, Norwegian klumsad (past participle) speechless, palsied by a
spasm or by fear or witchery; German verklammen grow stiff or numb with cold. Also compare clumse
(n.) a stupid fellow.


shtoom (adj.)

speechless, silent, from Yiddish, from German stumm silent, mute (see stammer (v.)).


slack-jawed (adj.)

1882, over-talkative, from slack-jaw (n.) impertinent language (1797), from slack (adj.) + jaw (n.).
Meaning open-mouthed and speechless from astonishment, stupidity, etc., is from 1905.


tongueless (adj.)

late 14c., having no tongue; early 15c. as speechless, silent, from tongue (n.) + -less. Related:
Tonguelessly; tonguelessness.


mute (adj.)

late 14c., mewet silent, from Old French muet dumb, mute (12c.), diminutive of mut, mo, from Latin
mutus silent, speechless, dumb, probably from imitative base *meue- (cognates: Sanskrit mukah dumb,
Greek myein to be shut, of the mouth). Form assimilated in 16c. to Latin mutus.


surd (adj.)

1550s, irrational (of numbers), from Latin surdus deaf, unheard, silent, dull; willfully deaf,
inattentive, possibly related to susurrus a muttering, whispering (see susurration). The
mathematical sense is from the use of Latin surdus to translate Arabic (jadhr) asamm deaf (root),
itself apparently a loan-translation of Greek alogos, literally speechless, without reason (Euclid
book x, Def.). In French, sourd remains the principal word for deaf. As a noun from 1540s. Related:
Surdity.


Pyrenees

1550s, from French Pyr&eacute;n&eacute;es, from Latin Pyren&aelig;i montes, from Greek Pyrene, name
of a daughter of Bebryx/Bebrycius who was beloved of Herakles; she is said to be buried in these
mountains (or that the mountains are the tomb Herakles reared over her corpse). The name is said to
mean literally fruit-stone, but Room says it might be Greek pyr fire + eneos dumb, speechless, which
perhaps translates or folk-etymologizes a Celtic goddess name. In medieval times there was no
overall name for the range and local people would have known only the names of individual mountains
and valleys [Room, Adrian, Place Names of the World, 2nd ed., McFarland &amp; Co., 2006]. Related:
Pyrenean.


dumb (adj.)

Old English dumb silent, unable to speak, from PIE *dheubh- confusion, stupefaction, dizziness, from
root *dheu- (1) dust, mist, vapor, smoke, and related notions of defective perception or wits.
The Old English, Old Saxon (dumb), Gothic (dumbs), and Old Norse (dumbr) forms of the word meant
only mute, speechless; in Old High German (thumb) it meant both this and stupid, and in Modern
German this latter became the only sense. Meaning foolish, ignorant was occasionally in Middle
English, but modern use (1823) comes from influence of German dumm. Related: dumber; dumbest.
Applied to silent contrivances, hence dumbwaiter. As a verb, in late Old English, to become mute;
c.1600, to make mute. To dumb (something) down is from 1933.


