spinoff (n.)

also spin-off, 1951 of corporate entities;  by 1967 of television shows, from spin + off. As a
figurative verbal phrase, by 1957. As an adjective, from 1966.


spin (n.)

1831, a rapid revolving motion, from spin (v.). Meaning fairly rapid ride is from 1856. Sense of a
twisting delivery in throwing or striking a ball is from 1851. Sense in physics is from 1926.
Meaning act of playing a phonograph record is from 1977. Meaning influence imparted by a media
source is from 1984.


spin (v.)

Old English spinnan (transitive) draw out and twist fibers into thread, strong verb (past tense
spann, past participle spunnen), from Proto-Germanic *spenwan (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian
spinna, Danish spinde, Dutch spinnen, Old High German spinnan, German spinnen, Gothic spinnan), from
PIE *spen-wo-, from root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Armenian henum I weave; Greek
patos garment, literally that which is spun; Lithuanian pinu I plait, braid, spandau I spin; Middle
Welsh cy-ffiniden spider; see span (v.)).    Intransitive senses of to form threads from fibrous
stuff; to twist, writhe developed in late Old English. Transitive sense of cause to turn rapidly is
from 1610s; intransitive meaning revolve, turn around rapidly first recorded 1660s. Meaning attempt
to influence reporters' minds after an event has taken place but before they have written about it
seems to have risen to popularity in the 1984 U.S. presidential campaign; as in spin doctor, first
attested 1984.


spinner (n.)

early 13c., spider, agent noun from spin (v.). Meaning person who spins textile thread is from late
14c.


spinster (n.)

mid-14c., female spinner of thread, from Middle English spinnen (see spin) + -stere, feminine suffix
(see -ster). Unmarried women were supposed to occupy themselves with spinning, hence the word came
to be the legal designation in England of all unmarried women from a viscount's daughter downward
[Century Dictionary] in documents from 1600s to early 1900s, and by 1719 the word was being used
generically for woman still unmarried and beyond the usual age for it.   Spinster, a terme, or an
addition in our Common Law, onely added in Obligations, Euidences, and Writings, vnto maids
vnmarried. [John Minsheu, Ductor in Linguas, 1617]    Strictly in reference to those who spin,
spinster also was used of both sexes (compare webster, baxter, brewster) and so a double-feminine
form emerged, spinstress a female spinner (1640s), which by 1716 also was being used for maiden
lady. Related: Spinsterhood.


spinnaker (n.)

large triangular sail, 1866, either a derivative of spin in the sense of go rapidly or a corrupt
pronunciation of Sphinx, which was the name of the first yacht known to carry this type of sail.


spinning (n.)

late 13c., verbal noun from spin (v.). Spinning wheel attested from c.1400. Spinning-jenny is from
1783 (see jenny); invented by James Hargreaves c.1764-7, patented 1770.


spindle (n.)

early 13c., with intrusive -d-, from Old English spinel small wooden bar used in hand-spinning,
properly an instrument for spinning, from stem of spinnan (see spin (v.)) + instrumental suffix -le
(compare handle, thimble, etc.    Related to Old Saxon spinnila, Old Frisian spindel, Old High
German spinnila, German Spindel. As a type of something slender, it is attested from 1570s. As with
distaff, sometimes formerly used as a metonym for the female sex, as in Old English spinelhealf
female line of descent, distinguished from sperehealf male line of descent.


spider (n.)

late 14c., spydyr, from earlier spi&#254;re, spi&#254;ur, spi&#254;er (14c.), from Old English
spi&#240;ra, from Proto-Germanic *spin-thron- (cognate with Danish spinder), literally the spinner,
from *spen-wo- to spin (see spin (v.)) + formative or agential *-thro. The connection with the root
is more transparent in other Germanic cognates (such as Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Middle High
German, German spinne, Dutch spin spider).    The male is commonly much smaller than the female, and
in impregnating the female runs great risk of being devoured. The difference in sizes is as if the
human female should be some 60 or 70 feet tall. [Century Dictionary]    Not the common word in Old
English, which identified the creatures as loppe, lobbe, also atorcoppe, and, from Latin, renge.
Another Old English word was gangewifre a weaver as he goes, and Middle English had araine spider
(14c.-15c., from French). In literature, often a figure of cunning, skill, and industry as well as
poisonous predation. As the name for a type of two-pack solitaire, it is attested from 1890. Spider
plant is from 1852; spider crab is from 1710, used of various species; spider monkey is from 1764,
so called for its long limbs.


profile (n.)

1650s, a drawing of the outline of anything, from older Italian profilo a drawing in outline, from
profilare to draw in outline, from pro- forth (see pro-) + filare draw out, spin, from Late Latin
filare to spin, draw out a line, from filum thread (see file (v.)). Meaning a side view is from
1660s. Meaning biographical sketch, character study is from 1734.


needle (n.)

Old English n&aelig;dl, from Proto-Germanic *n&aelig;thlo (cognates: Old Saxon nathla, Old Norse
nal, Old Frisian nedle, Old High German nadala, German Nadel, Gothic ne&thorn;la needle), literally
a tool for sewing, from PIE *net-la-, from root *(s)ne- to sew, to spin (cognates: Sanskrit snayati
wraps up, Greek nein to spin, Latin nere to spin, German n&#228;hen to sew, Old Church Slavonic niti
thread, Old Irish snathat needle, Welsh nyddu to sew, nodwydd needle) + instrumental suffix *-tla.To
seke out one lyne in all hys bookes wer to go looke a nedle in a meadow. [Thomas More,
c.1530]Meaning piece of magnetized steel in a compass is from late 14c. (on a dial or indicator from
1928); the surgical instrument so called from 1727; phonographic sense from 1902; sense of leaf of a
fir or pine tree first attested 1797. Needledom the world of sewing is from 1847. Needle's eye,
figurative of a minute opening, often is a reference to Matt. xix:24.


span (v.)

Old English spannan to join, link, clasp, fasten, bind, connect; stretch, span, from Proto-Germanic
*spannan (cognates: Old Norse spenna, Old Frisian spanna, Middle Dutch spannen, Dutch spannan
stretch, bend, hoist, hitch, Old High German spannan, German spannen to join, fasten, extend,
connect), from PIE root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Latin pendere to hang, to cause
to hang, pondus weight (perhaps the notion is the weight of a thing measured by how much it
stretches a cord), pensare to weigh, consider; Greek ponos toil, ponein to toil; Lithuanian spendziu
lay a snare; Old Church Slavonic peti stretch, strain, pato fetter, pina I span; Old English spinnan
to spin; for other cognates, see spin (v.)).    The meaning to encircle with the hand(s) is from
1781; in the sense of to form an arch over (something) it is first recorded 1630s. Related: Spanned;
spanning.


spun

past participle of spin (v.).


tailspin (n.)

downward spiraling dive of an aircraft, 1916, from tail (n.1) + spin (n.). Figurative sense of state
of loss of control is from 1928.


Monte Carlo fallacy

1957, named for resort in Monaco famous for its gambling casinos. The fallacy of thinking that the
probability of a particular outcome rises with the successive number of opposite outcomes. Contrary
to the Monte Carlo fallacy, if the roulette wheel stops on black 99 times in a row, the chances that
the 100th spin will be red are still just under 50-50.


English (n.2)

spin imparted to a ball (as in billiards), 1860, from French angl&eacute; angled (see angle (n.)),
which is similar to Anglais English.


bionic (adj.)

1901, as a term in the study of fossils, from Greek. bios life (see bio-). Meaning pertaining to
bionics is recorded from 1963. Popular sense of superhumanly gifted or durable is from 1976, from
popular U.S. television program The Bionic Man and its spin-offs.


filament (n.)

1590s, from Modern Latin filamentum, from Late Latin filare to spin, draw out in a long line, from
Latin filum thread (see file (v.)).


whirl (v.)

c.1300, probably from Old Norse hvirfla to go round, spin, related to hvirfill circle, ring, crown,
and to Old English hweorfan to turn (see wharf). Related: Whirled; whirling. Whirlybird helicopter
is from 1951.


Clotho

one of the three Fates, from Latin Clotho, from Greek Klotho, literally the spinner, from klothein
to spin. The three Fates together sometimes were called Klothes the spinners.


file (n.1)

1520s, string or wire on which documents are strung, from French file row, from Middle French filer
(see file (v.)). The meaning arranged collection of papers is from 1620s; computer sense is from
1954. The military sense line or row of men (1590s) is from the French verb in the sense of spin out
(thread); march in file.


Nematoda

a class of worms, Modern Latin compound of nemat- thread (from Greek nema, genitive nematos thread,
from stem of nein to spin; see needle (n.)) + -odes like, of the nature of (see -oid).


nematocyst (n.)

1875, from nemato-, comb. form of Greek nema, nematos thread (genitive nematos), from stem of nein
to spin (see needle (n.)) + cyst.


tergiversation (n.)

turning dishonestly from a straightforward action or statement; shifting, shuffling, equivocation,
1560s, from Latin tergiversationem (nominative tergiversatio) a shifting, evasion, declining,
refusing, from past participle stem of tergiversari turn one's back on, evade, from tergum the back
(of unknown origin) + versare to spin, turn (see versus).


taffeta (n.)

mid-14c., fine, smooth, lustrous silk cloth, also taffata, from Old French taffetas (early 14c.),
from Italian taffeta or Medieval Latin taffata, ultimately from Persian taftah silk or linen cloth,
noun use of past participle of taftan to twist, spin, weave, interlace, from Iranian *tap-. Applied
to different fabrics in different eras (and see tapestry).


rhombus (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin rhombus, from Greek rhombos rhombus, rhomb, lozenge; spinning top, maghic
wheel used by sorcerers; a spinning motion, from rhembesthai to spin, whirl, from PIE *wrembh-, from
*werbh- to turn, twist, bend (source also of Old English weorpan to throw away), from root *wer- (3)
to turn, bend (see versus).


twist (v.)

c.1200 (implied in past tense form twaste), to wring, from twist (n.). Sense of to spin two or more
strands of yarn into thread is attested from late 15c. Meaning to move in a winding fashion is
recorded from 1630s.  To twist the lion's tail was U.S. slang (1895) for to provoke British feeling
(the lion being the symbol of Britain). To twist (someone's) arm in the figurative sense of pressure
(to do something) is from 1945. Related: Twisted; twisting.


contact (n.)

1620s, action of touching, from Latin contactus a touching, from past participle of contingere to
touch, seize, from com- together (see com-) + tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)).    Figurative
sense of connection, communication is from 1818. As a signal to the person about to spin an aircraft
propeller that the ignition is switched on, the word was in use by 1913. Contact lens is first
recorded 1888; short form contact is from 1961.


snood (n.)

Old English snod ribbon for the hair, from Proto-Germanic *snodo (cognates: Swedish snod string,
cord), from PIE root *(s)ne- to spin, sew (cognates: Lettish snate a linen cover, Old Irish snathe
thread; see needle (n.)). In the Middle Ages, typically worn by young unmarried girls, hence It was
held to be emblematic of maidenhood or virginity [Century Dictionary]. Modern fashion meaning bag-
like hair net first recorded 1938 (these also were worn by girls in the Middle Ages, but they are
not snoods properly).


frock (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French froc a monk's habit (12c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Frankish *hrok
or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German hroc mantle, coat; Old Norse rokkr, Old
English rocc, Old Frisian rokk, German Rock coat), from PIE root *rug- to spin.    Another theory
traces it to Medieval Latin floccus, from Latin floccus flock of wool. Meaning outer garment for
women or children is from 1530s. Frock-coat attested by 1823.


handle (n.)

Old English handle, formed from hand (n.) with instrumental suffix -le indicating a tool in the way
thimble was formed from thumb, spindle from spin, treadle from tread, etc. The slang sense of
nickname is first recorded 1870, originally U.S., from earlier expressions about adding a handle to
(one's) name, i.e. a title such as Mister or Sir, attested from 1833. To fly off the handle (1833)
is a figurative reference to an ax head (to be off the handle be excited is recorded from 1825,
American English). To get a handle on get control of is recorded by 1919.


yarn (n.)

Old English gearn spun fiber, spun wool, from Proto-Germanic *garnan (cognates: Old Norse, Old High
German, German garn, Middle Dutch gaern, Dutch garen yarn), from PIE root *ghere- intestine, gut,
entrail (cognates: Old Norse gorn gut, Sanskrit hira vein; entrails, Latin hernia rupture, Greek
khorde intestine, gut-string, Lithuanian zarna gut). The phrase to spin a yarn to tell a story is
first attested 1812, from a sailors' expression, on notion of telling stories while engaged in
sedentary work such as yarn-twisting.


twitter (v.)

late 14c., twiteren, in reference to birds, of imitative origin (compare Old High German zwizziron,
German zwitschern, Danish kvidre, Old Swedish kvitra). The noun meaning condition of tremulous
excitement is attested from 1670s. The microblogging service with the 140-character limit was
introduced in 2006. The following is considered an unrelated word of obscure origin:    TWITTER. 1.
That part of a thread that is spun too small. Yarn is said to be twined to twitters, when twined too
small, S. Hence, to twitter yarn, to spin it unequally, A. Bor. Ray.  2. It is transferred to any
person or thing that is slender or feeble. It is said of a lank delicate girl: She is a mere
twitter, S. [Jamieson, Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language, Edinburgh, 1808]


hurdle (n.)

Old English hyrdel frame of intertwined twigs used as a temporary barrier, diminutive of hyrd door,
from Proto-Germanic *hurdiz wickerwork frame, hurdle (cognates: Old Saxon hurth plaiting, netting,
Dutch horde wickerwork, German H&uuml;rde hurdle, fold, pen; Old Norse hur&eth;, Gothic haurds
door), from PIE *krtis (cognates: Latin cratis hurdle, wickerwork, Greek kartalos a kind of basket,
kyrtos fishing creel), from root *kert- to weave, twist together (cognates: Sanskrit krt to spin).
Sense of barrier to jump in a race is by 1822; figurative sense of obstacle is 1924.


