exorcise (v.)

c.1400, to invoke spirits, from Old French exorciser (14c.), from Late Latin exorcizare, from Greek
exorkizein banish an evil spirit; bind by oath (see exorcism). Sense of calling up evil spirits to
drive them out became dominant 16c. A rare case where -ise trumps -ize on both sides of the
Atlantic, perhaps by influence of exercise. Related: Exorcised; exorcising.


ardent (adj.)

early 14c., of alcoholic distillates, brandy (ardent spirits), etc., from Old French ardant (13c.)
burning, hot; zealous, from Latin ardentem (nominative ardens) glowing, fiery, hot, ablaze, also
used figuratively of passions, present participle of ardere to burn, from PIE root *as- to burn,
glow from PIE root *as- to burn, glow (cognates: Old English &aelig;sce ashes; see ash (n.1)).
Ardent spirits (late 15c.) so called because they are inflammable, but the term now, if used at all,
probably is felt in the figurative sense. The figurative sense (of burning with passions, desire,
etc.) is from late 14c.; literal sense of burning, parching (c.1400) remains rare. Related:
Ardently.


blues (n.)

as a music form featuring flatted thirds and sevenths, possibly c.1895 (though officially 1912, in
W.C. Handy's Memphis Blues); meaning depression, low spirits goes back to 1741, from adjectival blue
low-spirited, late 14c.


ectoplasm (n.)

1883, of amoebas, 1901, of spirits, from ecto- + -plasm.


buoyancy (n.)

1713, from buoyant + -cy. Figurative sense (of spirits, etc.) is from 1819.


droopy (adj.)

dejected, sad, gloomy, early 13c., drupie, perhaps from droop, perhaps from Old Norse drupr drooping
spirits, faintness.


nip (n.1)

small measure of spirits, 1796, shortening of nipperkin (1670s) quantity of liquor of a half pint or
less, possibly of Dutch or Low German origin and related to nip (v.). Reinforced by nip (n.2) on
notion of fragment or bit pinched off (c.1600).


magnum (n.)

1788, bottle containing two quarts of wine or spirits, from Latin magnum, neuter of magnus great in
size (see magnate). Registered 1935 by Smith &amp; Wesson Inc., of Springfield, Massachusetts, as
the name of a powerful type of handgun.


damp (v.)

late 14c., to suffocate, from damp (n.). Figurative meaning to deaden (the spirits, etc.) attested
by 1540s. Meaning to moisten is recorded from 1670s. Related: Damped; damping.


jinn (n.)

1680s, djen, from Arabic jinn, collective plural, demons, spirits, angels. The proper singular is
jinni. Compare genie.


aqua vitae (n.)

early 15c., Latin, literally water of life, an alchemical term for unrefined alcohol. Applied to
brandy, whiskey, etc. from 1540s. Compare whiskey, also French eau-de-vie spirits, brandy, literally
water of life.


pub (n.)

1859, slang shortening of public house (see public (adj.)), which originally meant any building open
to the public (1570s), then inn that provides food and is licensed to sell ale, wine, and spirits
(1660s), and finally tavern (1768). Pub crawl first attested 1910 in British slang.


shadowland (n.)

also shadow-land, 1821, abode of ghosts and spirits, from shadow (n.) + land (n.). From 1923 as
indeterminate place.


buoy (v.)

late 16c., to mark with a buoy, from buoy (n.). Meaning rise up, lift, sustain is from c.1600,
perhaps influenced by Spanish boyar to float, ultimately from the same source. In the figurative
sense (of hopes, spirits, etc.) it is recorded from 1640s. Related: Buoyed; buoying.


evoke (v.)

1620s, from French &eacute;voquer or directly from Latin evocare call out, rouse, summon (see
evocation). Often more or less with a sense of calling spirits, or being called by them. Related:
Evoked; evokes; evoking.


punch (n.2)

type of mixed drink, 1630s, traditionally since 17c. said to derive from Hindi panch five, in
reference to the number of original ingredients (spirits, water, lemon juice, sugar, spice), from
Sanskrit panchan-s, from pancha five (see five). But there are difficulties (see OED), and
connection to puncheon (n.1) is not impossible.


Davy Jones

the spirit of the sea, 1751, first mentioned in Smollett's The Adventures of Peregrin Pickle
(chapter 15) as an ominous and terrifying fiend who presides over all the evil spirits of the deep,
and is often seen in various shapes, perching among the rigging on the eve of hurricanes, shipwrecks
and other disasters. Davy Jones's Locker bottom of the sea, is 1803, from nautical slang, of unknown
origin; second element may be from biblical Jonah, regarded as unlucky by sailors.


dumps (n.)

low spirits, 1520s, plural of dumpe a fit of musing, possibly from Dutch domp haze, mist, from
Middle Dutch damp vapor (see damp (n.)).


turn-off (n.)

something that dampens one's spirits recorded by 1971 (said to have been in use since 1968), from
verbal phrase turn off stop the flow of (1850), from turn (v.) + off (adv.). Turn-off (n.) as place
where one road diverges from another is from 1881.


cheerful (adj.)

c.1400, full of cheer, from cheer (n.) + -ful. Meaning elevating the spirits is from mid-15c.
Related: Cheerfully; cheerfulness.


exorcist (n.)

one who drives out evil spirits, late 14c., from Late Latin exorcista, from Ecclesiastical Greek
exorkistes an exorcist, from exorkizein (see exorcism).


invocation (n.)

late 14c., petition (to God or a god) for aid or comfort; invocation, prayer; also a summoning of
evil spirits, from Old French invocacion (12c.), from Latin invocationem (nominative invocatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of invocare to call upon, invoke, appeal to (see invoke).


oppression (n.)

mid-14c., cruel or unjust use of power or authority, from Old French opression (12c.), from Latin
oppressionem (nominative oppressio) a pressing down; violence, oppression, noun of action from past
participle stem of opprimere (see oppress). Meaning action of weighing on someone's mind or spirits
is from late 14c.


Manes (pl.)

Gods of the Lower World, in Roman religion, from Latin manes departed spirit, ghost, shade of the
dead, deified spirits of the underworld, usually said to be from Latin manus good, thus properly the
good gods, a euphemistic word, but Tucker suggests a possible connection instead to macer, thus the
thin or unsubstantial ones.


benedict (n.)

newly married man (especially one who had seemed a confirmed bachelor), 1821, from the character
Benedick in Much Ado About Nothing (1599). The name is from Late Latin Benedictus, literally
blessed, from Latin benedicte bless (you) (see benediction). This also produced the proper name
Bennet; hence also benet (late 14c.), the third of the four lesser orders of the Roman Catholic
Church, one of whose functions was to exorcize spirits.


Sadducee (n.)

Old English, from Late Latin Sadducaei (plural), from Greek Zaddoukaios, an inexact transliteration
of Hebrew tzedoqi, from personal name Tzadhoq Zadok (2 Sam. viii:17), the high priest from whom the
priesthood of the captivity claimed descent. According to Josephus, the sect denied the resurrection
of the dead and the existence of angels and spirits; but later historians regard them as more the
political party of the priestly class than a sect per se. Related: Sadducean.


exorcism (n.)

early 15c., a calling up or driving out of evil spirits, from Late Latin exorcismus, from Greek
exorkismos, from exorkizein exorcize, bind by oath, from ex out of (see ex-) + horkizein cause to
swear, from horkos oath. Earlier in the same sense was exorcization (late 14c.).


Erinys (n.)

(plural erinyes), one of the three avenging spirits (Alecto, Tisiphone, Megaera) in Greek religion,
of unknown origin, perhaps the angry spirit (compare Arcadian erinein to be angry, Greek orinein to
raise, stir, excite, eris strife, discord). Related: Erinnic.


obsess (v.)

c.1500, to besiege, from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere watch closely; besiege, occupy;
stay, remain, abide literally sit opposite to, from ob against (see ob-) + sedere sit (see
sedentary). Of evil spirits, to haunt, from 1530s. Psychological sense is 20c. Related: Obsessed;
obsessing.


banshee (n.)

1771, from phonetic spelling of Irish bean sidhe female of the Elves, from bean woman (from PIE
*gwen-; see queen) + sidhe, from sith fairy or sid fairy mound. Specifically, one who calls to the
spirits of the dead.


larva (n.)

1650s, a ghost, specter, from Latin larva (plural larvae), earlier larua ghost, also mask; applied
in biological sense 1768 by Linnaeus because immature forms of insects mask the adult forms. On the
double sense of the Latin word, Carlo Ginzburg, among other students of mythology and folklore, has
commented on the well-nigh universal association between masks and the spirits of the dead.


anger (n.)

mid-13c., distress, suffering; anguish, agony, also hostile attitude, ill will, surliness, from Old
Norse angr distress, grief. sorrow, affliction, from the same root as anger (v.). Sense of rage,
wrath is early 14c. Old Norse also had angr-gapi rash, foolish person; angr-lauss free from care;
angr-lyndi sadness, low spirits.


amyl (n.)

hydrocarbon radical, 1850, from Latin amylum, from Greek amylon fine meal, starch, noun use of
neuter of adjective amylos not ground at the mill, ground by hand, from a-, privative prefix, not +
myle mill (see mill (n.1)). So called because first obtained from the distilled spirits of potato or
grain starch (though it also is obtained from other sources).


pert (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in pertly), evident, unconcealed, shortened form of Middle English apert open,
frank, from Old French apert, from Latin apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see overt).
Sense of saucy, bold first recorded late 14c. Less pejorative meaning lively, brisk, in good spirits
(c.1500) survives in U.S. dialectal peart (with Middle English alternative spelling). Related:
Pertness.


elation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French elacion elation, conceit, arrogance, vanity, from Latin elationem
(nominative elatio), noun of action from elatus elevated, form used as past participle of efferre,
from ex- out + latus (see oblate (n.)), past participle of ferre carry (see infer). Metaphoric sense
of lifting spirits was in Latin and has always been the principal meaning in English.


artery (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arterie, Old French artaire (13c.; Modern French art&egrave;re), and
directly from Latin arteria, from Greek arteria windpipe, also an artery, as distinct from a vein;
related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    They were regarded by the ancients as air ducts because
the arteries do not contain blood after death; medieval writers took them for the channels of the
vital spirits, and 16c. senses of artery in English include trachea, windpipe. The word is used in
reference to artery-like systems of major rivers from 1805; of railways from 1850.


sylph (n.)

1650s, air-spirit, from Modern Latin sylphes (plural), coined 16c. by Paracelsus (1493-1541),
originally referring to any race of spirits inhabiting the air, described as being mortal but
lacking a soul. Paracelsus' word seems to be an arbitrary coinage, but perhaps it holds a suggestion
of Latin silva and Greek nymph, or Greek silphe a kind of beetle, but French etymologists propose a
Gaulish origin. The Century Dictionary comments that, to occultists and quacks like Paracelsus words
spelled with -y- look more Greek and convincing. The meaning graceful girl first recorded 1838, on
the notion of slender figure and light, airy movement [OED].


pit (n.1)

hole, cavity, Old English pytt water hole, well; pit, grave, from Proto-Germanic *puttjaz pool,
puddle (cognates: Old Frisian pet, Old Saxon putti, Old Norse pyttr, Middle Dutch putte, Dutch put,
Old High German pfuzza, German Pf&uuml;tze pool, puddle), early borrowing from Latin puteus well,
pit, shaft. Meaning abode of evil spirits, hell is attested from early 13c. Pit of the stomach
(1650s) is from the slight depression there between the ribs.


depression (n.)

late 14c. as a term in astronomy, from Old French depression (14c.) or directly from Latin
depressionem (nominative depressio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprimere to press
down, depress (see depress).    Attested from 1650s in the literal sense; meaning dejection,
depression of spirits is from early 15c. (as a clinical term in psychology, from 1905);
meteorological sense is from 1881 (in reference to barometric pressure); meaning a lowering or
reduction in economic activity was in use by 1826; given a specific application (with capital D-) by
1934 to the one that began worldwide in 1929. For melancholy, depression an Old English word was
grevoushede.


hype (n.)

excessive or misleading publicity or advertising, 1967, American English (the verb is attested from
1937), probably in part a back-formation of hyperbole, but also from underworld slang sense swindle
by overcharging or short-changing (1926), a back-formation of hyper short-change con man (1914),
from prefix hyper- meaning over, to excess. Also possibly influenced by drug addicts' slang hype,
1913 shortening of hypodermic needle. Related: Hyped; hyping. In early 18c., hyp morbid depression
of the spirits was colloquial for hypochondria (usually as the hyp or the hyps).


comic (adj.)

late 14c., of comedy in the dramatic sense, from Latin comicus of comedy, represented in comedy, in
comic style, from Greek komikos of or pertaining to comedy, from komos (see comedy). Meaning
intentionally funny first recorded 1791, and comedic (1630s) has since picked up the older sense of
the word.Speaking of the masters of the comedic spirit (if I call it, as he does, the Comic Spirit,
this darkened generation will suppose me to refer to the animal spirits of tomfools and
merryandrews) .... [G.B. Shaw, 1897]  Something that is comic has comedy as its aim or origin;
something is comical if the effect is comedy, whether intended or not.


goblin (n.)

early 14c., a devil, incubus, fairy, from Old French gobelin (12c., as Medieval Latin Gobelinus, the
name of a spirit haunting the region of Evreux, in chronicle of Ordericus Vitalis), of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to German kobold (see cobalt), or from Medieval Latin cabalus, from Greek
kobalos rogue, knave, kobaloi wicked spirits invoked by rogues, of unknown origin. Another
suggestion is that it is a diminutive of the proper name Gobel.    Though French gobelin was not
recorded until almost 250 years after appearance of the English term, it is mentioned in the
Medieval Latin text of the 1100's, and few people who believed in folk magic used Medieval Latin.
[Barnhart]


lamia (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lamia, from Greek lamia female vampire, literally swallower, lecher, from
laimos throat, gullet. Probably cognate with Latin lemures spirits of the dead (see lemur). Used in
early translations of the Bible for screech owls and sea monsters. Sometimes also, apparently,
mermaids.    Also kynde erre&thorn; in som beestes wondirliche j-schape, as it fare&thorn; in a
beest &thorn;at hatte lamia, &thorn;at ha&thorn; an heed as a mayde &amp; body as a grym fissche[;]
whan &thorn;at best lamya may fynde ony man, first a flatere&thorn; wi&thorn; hym with a wommannes
face and make&thorn; hym ligge by here while he may dure, &amp; whanne he may nofer&thorn;ere
suffice to here lecherye &thorn;anne he rende&thorn; hym and sle&thorn; and ete&thorn; hym. [John of
Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


thin (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ynne narrow, lean, scanty, not dense; fluid, tenuous; weak, poor, from Proto-
Germanic *thunni thin (cognates: West Frisian ten, Middle Low German dunne, Middle Dutch dunne,
Dutch dun, Old High German dunni, German d&uuml;nn, Old Norse &thorn;unnr, Swedish tunn, Danish
tynd), from PIE *tnu- stretched, stretched out (hence thin), from root *ten- to stretch (cognates:
Latin tenuis thin, slender; see tenet).    These our actors ... were all Spirits, and Are melted
into Ayre, into thin Ayre. [Shakespeare, The Tempest, IV.i.150, 1610]    Loose or sparse, hence
easily seen through, with figurative extensions. Related: Thinly; thinness. Thin-skinned is attested
from 1590s; the figurative sense of touchy is from 1670s.


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


gas (n.)

1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos empty space (see chaos). The sound of Dutch g is
roughly equivalent to that of Greek kh. First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644),
probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of proper elements of spirits
or ultra-rarified water, which was van Helmont's definition of gas.    Modern scientific sense began
1779, with later specialization to combustible mix of vapors (1794, originally coal gas); anesthetic
(1894, originally nitrous oxide); and poison gas (1900). Meaning intestinal vapors is from 1882. The
success of this artificial word is unique [Weekley]. Slang sense of empty talk is from 1847; slang
meaning something exciting or excellent first attested 1953, from earlier hepster slang gasser in
the same sense (1944). Gas also meant fun, a joke in Anglo-Irish and was used so by Joyce (1914). As
short for gasoline, it is American English, first recorded 1905.


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


conservative (adj.)

late 14c., conservatyf, from Middle French conservatif, from Late Latin conservativus, from Latin
conservatus, past participle of conservare (see conserve).    As a modern political tradition,
conservatism traces to Edmund Burke's opposition to the French Revolution (1790), but the word
conservative is not found in his writing. It was coined by his French disciples, (such as
Chateaubriand, who titled his journal defending clerical and political restoration Le Conservateur).
Conservative as the name of a British political faction first appeared in an 1830 issue of the
Quarterly Review, in an unsigned article sometimes attributed to John Wilson Croker. It replaced
Tory (q.v.) by 1843, reflecting both a change from the pejorative name (in use for 150 years) and
repudiation of some reactionary policies. Extended to similar spirits in other parties from
1845.Strictly speaking, conservatism is not a political system, but rather a way of looking at the
civil order. The conservative of Peru ... will differ greatly from those of Australia, for though
they may share a preference for things established, the institutions and customs which they desire
to preserve are not identical. [Russell Kirk (1918-1994)]  Phrases such as a conservative estimate
make no sense etymologically. The noun is attested from 1831, originally in the British political
sense.


character (n.)

mid-14c., carecter, symbol marked or branded on the body; mid-15c., symbol or drawing used in
sorcery, from Old French caratere feature, character (13c., Modern French caract&egrave;re), from
Latin character, from Greek kharakter engraved mark, also symbol or imprint on the soul, also
instrument for marking, from kharassein to engrave, from kharax pointed stake, from PIE root *gher-
(4) to scrape, scratch. Meaning extended in ancient times by metaphor to a defining quality.You
remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically?
The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover
from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]Meaning sum of qualities that define a person is from 1640s. Sense of
person in a play or novel is first attested 1660s, in reference to the defining qualities he or she
is given by the author. Meaning a person in the abstract is from 1749; especially eccentric person
(1773). Colloquial sense of chap, fellow is from 1931. The Latin ch- spelling was restored from
1500s. Character actor attested from 1861; character assassination from 1888; character-building
(n.) from 1886.


ghost (n.)

Old English gast soul, spirit, life, breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon, from Proto-Germanic
*ghoizdoz (cognates: Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German
Geist spirit, ghost), from PIE root *gheis- to be excited, amazed, frightened (cognates: Sanskrit
hedah wrath; Avestan zaesha- horrible, frightful; Gothic usgaisjan, Old English g&aelig;stan to
frighten). This was the usual West Germanic word for supernatural being, and the primary sense seems
to have been connected to the idea of to wound, tear, pull to pieces. The surviving Old English
senses, however, are in Christian writing, where it is used to render Latin spiritus (see spirit
(n.)), a sense preserved in Holy Ghost. Modern sense of disembodied spirit of a dead person is
attested from late 14c. and returns the word toward its ancient sense.    Most Indo-European words
for soul, spirit also double with reference to supernatural spirits. Many have a base sense of
appearance (such as Greek phantasma; French spectre; Polish widmo, from Old Church Slavonic videti
to see; Old English scin, Old High German giskin, originally appearance, apparition, related to Old
English scinan, Old High German skinan to shine). Other concepts are in French revenant, literally
returning (from the other world), Old Norse aptr-ganga, literally back-comer. Breton bugelnoz is
literally night-child. Latin manes probably is a euphemism.    The gh- spelling appeared early 15c.
in Caxton, influenced by Flemish and Middle Dutch gheest, but was rare in English before mid-16c.
Sense of slight suggestion (in ghost image, ghost of a chance, etc.) is first recorded 1610s; that
in ghost writing is from 1884, but that term is not found until 1919. Ghost town is from 1908. To
give up the ghost die was in Old English. Ghost in the machine was Gilbert Ryle's term (1949) for
the mind viewed as separate from the body.


