spittle (n.)

saliva, spit, late 15c., probably an alteration (by influence of spit (n.1)) of Old English
sp&aelig;tl, spatl, from Proto-Germanic *spait- (cognates: Old English sp&aelig;tan to spit), from
PIE root *sp(y)eu- to spew, spit (see spew (v.)).


lickspittle (n.)

also lick-spittle, sycophant, abject toady, 1741, from lick (v.1) + spittle.


Spitalfields

district east of London, famed for the work of refugee Huguenot weavers who took up residence there,
from St. Mary Spital, from spital, a Middle English shortened form of hospital, sometimes also
spittle, hence spittle-man one who lives in a hospital.


saliva (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French salive, from Latin saliva spittle, of unknown origin (perhaps, as
Tucker suggests, somehow derived from the base of sallow (adj.)).


pond (n.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. in compounds), artificially banked body of water, variant of pound enclosed place
(see pound (n.2)). Applied locally to natural pools and small lakes from late 15c. Jocular reference
to the Atlantic Ocean dates from 1640s. Pond scum (Spirogyra) is from 1864 (also called frog-spittle
and brook-silk. As figurative for someone extremely repulsive, from 1984.


spit (v.1)

expel saliva, Old English spittan (Anglian), sp&aelig;tan (West Saxon), transitive and intransitive,
past tense *spytte, from Proto-Germanic *spitjan, from PIE *sp(y)eu-, of imitative origin (see spew
(v.)). Not the usual Old English word for this; sp&aelig;tlan (see spittle) and spiwan are more
common; all are from the same root. To spit as a gesture of contempt (especially at someone) is in
Old English. Related: Spat; spitting.


slime (n.)

Old English slim slime, from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (cognates: Old Norse slim, Old Frisian slym,
Dutch slijm slime, phlegm, German Schleim slime), probably related to Old English lim birdlime;
sticky substance, from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (cognates: Sanskrit linati sticks,
stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears; Russian slimak snail; Old Church Slavonic slina spittle;
Old Irish sligim to smear, leinam I follow, literally I stick to; Welsh llyfn smooth; Greek leimax
snail, limne marsh, pool, lake, alinein to anoint, besmear; Latin limus slime, mud, mire, linere to
daub, besmear, rub out, erase). As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Slime-mold is from 1880.


