splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


splendidly (adv.)

1650s, from splendid + -ly (2).


resplendent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin resplendentem (nominative resplendens) brilliant, radiant, present participle
of resplendere to glitter, shine, from re-, intensive prefix, + splendere to shine, be splendid (see
splendid). Related: Resplendently.


palace (n.)

early 13c., official residence of an emperor, king, archbishop, etc., from Old French palais palace,
court, from Medieval Latin palacium a palace (source of Spanish palacio, Italian palazzo), from
Latin palatium the Palatine hill, in plural, a palace, from Mons Palatinus the Palatine Hill, one of
the seven hills of ancient Rome, where Augustus Caesar's house stood (the original palace), later
the site of the splendid residence built by Nero. In English, the general sense of splendid dwelling
place is from late 14c.    The hill name probably is ultimately from palus stake, on the notion of
enclosure. Another guess is that it is from Etruscan and connected with Pales, supposed name of an
Italic goddess of shepherds and cattle.


royal (adj.)

mid-13c., fit for a king; late 14c., pertaining to a king, from Old French roial royal, regal;
splendid, magnificent (12c., Modern French royal), from Latin regalis of a king, kingly, royal,
regal, from rex (genitive regis) king (see rex). Meaning thorough, total attested from 1940s; that
of splendid, first-rate from 1853.    Battle royal (1670s) preserves the French custom of putting
the adjective after the noun (as in attorney general); the sense of the adjective here is on a grand
scale (compare pair-royal three of a kind in cards or dice, c.1600). The Royal Oak was a tree in
Boscobel in Shropshire in which Charles II hid himself during flight after the Battle of Worcester
in 1651. Sprigs of oak were worn to commemorate his restoration in 1660.


Aglaia

one of the Graces, Greek, literally splendor, beauty, brightness, from aglaos splendid, beautiful,
bright, of unknown origin.


purple (n., adj.)

Old English purpul, dissimilation (first recorded in Northumbrian, in Lindisfarne gospel) of purpure
purple dye, a purple garment, purpuren (adj.) purple, a borrowing by 9c. from Latin purpura purple
color, purple-dyed cloak, purple dye, also shellfish from which purple was made, and splendid attire
generally, from Greek porphyra purple dye, purple (see porphyry), of uncertain origin, perhaps
Semitic, originally the name for the shellfish (murex) from which it was obtained. Purpur continued
as a parallel form until 15c., and through 19c. in heraldry. As a color name, attested from early
15c. Tyrian purple, produced around Tyre, was prized as dye for royal garments.    Also the color of
mourning or penitence (especially in royalty or clergy). Rhetorical for splendid, gaudy (of prose)
from 1590s. Purple Heart, U.S. decoration for service members wounded in combat, instituted 1932;
originally a cloth decoration begun by George Washington in 1782. Hendrix' Purple Haze (1967) is
slang for LSD.


stunning (adj.)

1660s, dazzling, present participle adjective from stun (v.). Popularized for splendid, excellent
c.1849. Related: Stunningly.


ripping (adj.)

cutting, 1714, present participle adjective from rip (v.). Slange meaning Very fast, rapid os from
1826, hence further slang development excellent, splendid (1846.). Related: Rippingly.


pageantry (n.)

splendid display, 1650s; see pageant + -ry.


magnificently (adv.)

in a splendid manner, early 15c.; see magnificent + -ly (2).


scrumptious (adj.)

1833, in countrified humor writing of Major Jack Downing of Maine (Seba Smith); probably a
colloquial alteration of sumptuous. Originally stylish, splendid; sense of delicious is by 1881.
Related: Scrumptiously; scrumptiousness.


superb (adj.)

1540s, noble, magnificent (of buildings, etc.), from Latin superbus grand, proud, splendid; haughty,
vain, insolent, from super above, over (see super-). The second element perhaps is from PIE root
*bhe- to be. General sense of very fine developed by 1729. Related: Superbious (c.1500); superbly.


marvelous (adj.)

c.1300, causing wonder, from Old French merveillos marvelous, wonderful (Modern French merveilleux),
from merveille (see marvel (n.)). Weakened sense of splendid, very nice is from 1924. Related:
Marvelously.


stately (adj.)

noble, splendid, late 14c., from -ly (1) + state (n.1) in a sense of costly and imposing display
(such as benefits a person of rank and wealth), attested from early 14c. This sense also is
preserved in the phrase to lie in state to be ceremoniously exposed to view before interment (1705).
Hence also stateroom. Related: Stateliness.


panoply (n.)

1570s, from Greek panoplia complete suit of armor, from pan- all (see pan-) + hopla (plural), arms
of a hoplites (heavily armed soldier); see hoplite. Originally in English figurative, of spiritual
armor, etc. (a reference to Eph. vi); non-armorial sense of any splendid array first recorded 1829.


gorgeous (adj.)

late 15c., splendid, showy (of clothing), from Middle French gorgias elegant, fashionable, of
unknown origin; perhaps literally necklace (and thus fond of jewelry), from Old French gorge bosom,
throat, also something adorning the throat. A connection to the Greek proper name Gorgias
(supposedly in reference to a notorious sophist) also has been proposed. Related: Gorgeousness.


cold shoulder (n.)

1816, in the figurative sense of icy reception, first in Sir Walter Scott, probably originally a
literal figure, but commonly used with a punning reference to cold shoulder of mutton, considered a
poor man's dish and thus, perhaps, something one would set out for an unwanted guest with deliberate
intention to convey displeasure.    How often have we admired the poor knight, who, to avoid the
snares of bribery and dependence, was found making a second dinner from a cold shoulder of mutton,
above the most affluent courtier, who had sold himself to others for a splendid pension! [No
Fiction, 1820]


amplify (v.)

early 15c., to enlarge or expand, from Middle French amplifier, from Latin amplificare to enlarge,
from amplificus splendid, from amplus large (see ample) + the root of facere make, do (see
factitious). Meaning augment in volume or amount is from 1570s. Restriction of use to sound seems to
have emerged in the electronic age, c.1915, in reference to radio technology.


ripper (n.)

1610s, agent noun from rip (v.). Meaning killer who mutilates his victims (1890) is from Jack the
Ripper, notorious London murderer, whose nickname contains a pun on ripper in sense of tool for
ripping old slates, etc. (1823) and the slang meaning excellent person or thing, a 'ripping' fellow
(1838), from ripping excellent, splendid.


wl-

an initial sound cluster in words in Old English and early Middle English; among the Old English
words were wlanc stately, splendid; wl&#230;tung nausea; wlenc pride, arrogance (Middle English
wlonk); wlite brightness, beauty, splendor; wlitig radiant, physically beautiful (Middle English
wliti).


comely (adj.)

beautiful, handsome, c.1400, probably from Old English cymlic lovely, splendid, finely made, from
cyme exquisite, glorious, delicate, from West Germanic *kumi- delicate, feeble (cognates: Old High
German chumo with difficulty, chumig weak, delicate; German kaum hardly, scarcely). Or perhaps the
modern word is from Middle English bicumelic (c.1200) suitable, exquisite, literally becomely
(compare becoming).


splendor (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French esplendour, Anglo-French esplendour (Old French splendeur, splendor,
12c.) or directly from Latin splendor brilliance, brightness, from splendere be bright, shine (see
splendid).


bright (adj.)

Old English bryht, by metathesis from beorht bright; splendid; clear-sounding; beautiful; divine,
from Proto-Germanic *berhta- bright (cognates: Old Saxon berht, Old Norse bjartr, Old High German
beraht, Gothic bairhts bright), from PIE root *bhereg- to gleam, white (cognates: Sanskrit bhrajate
shines, glitters, Lithuanian breksta to dawn, Welsh berth bright, beautiful). Meaning quick-witted
is from 1741.


aureate (adj.)

early 15c., gold, gold-colored, also figuratively, splendid, brilliant, from Latin aureatus
decorated with gold, from aureus golden, from aurum gold, from PIE root *aus- (2) gold (cognates:
Sanskrit ayah metal, Avestan ayo, Latin aes brass, Old English ar brass, copper, bronze, Gothic aiz
bronze, Old Lithuanian ausas gold), probably related to root *aus- to shine (see aurora).


magnificence (n.)

mid-14c., great-mindedness, courage, from Old French magnificence splendor, nobility, grandeur, from
Latin magnificentia splendor, munificence, from stem of magnificus great, elevated, noble, eminent,
also splendid, rich, fine, costly, literally doing great deeds, from magnus great (see magnate) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Meaning greatness, grandeur, glory in English is from late
14c. That of beauty, splendor, wealth is 15c. As one of the Aristotelian and scholastic virtues, it
translates Greek megaloprepeia liberality of expenditure combined with good taste.


Pullman (n.)

sleeping car on a passenger train, 1867, Pullman car, in recognition of U.S. inventor George M.
Pullman (1831-1897) of Chicago, who designed a railroad car with folding berths.    The Pullman
Sleeping Car.--The Western World. This splendid specimen of car architecture, being one of a number
of sleeping-cars to be completed   for the Michigan Central road, by Mr. Pullman, has created a
great sensation among railway circles east. ... The car itself is admitted by all who have seen it
to be, in the matter of sleeping and cooking accessories, and superb finish, the ne plus ultra of
perfection. Nothing before has been seen to equal, much less surpass it. [Western Railroad Gazette,
Chicago, quoted in Appleton's Illustrated Railway and Steam Navigation Guide, New York, June, 1867]


brave (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French brave, splendid, valiant, from Italian bravo brave, bold, originally
wild, savage, possibly from Medieval Latin bravus cutthroat, villain, from Latin pravus crooked,
depraved; a less likely etymology being from Latin barbarus (see barbarous). A Celtic origin (Irish
breagh, Cornish bray) also has been suggested.    Old English words for this, some with overtones of
rashness, included modig (now moody), beald (bold), cene (keen), dyrstig (daring). Brave new world
is from the title of Aldous Huxley's 1932 satirical utopian novel; he lifted the phrase from
Shakespeare (Tempest v.i.183).


Ostrogoth (n.)

c.1600, one of the East Goths, who conquered Italy late 5c. and established, under Theodric, a
kingdom there that lasted from 493 to 555 C.E., from Late Latin Ostrogoth&aelig;, from Germanic,
literally eastern Goths from Proto-Germanic *aust(a)r- east (see east; for second element, see Goth;
also see Visigoth), but according to Klein this is a folk corruption of an earlier Austrogoti, from
a Germanic compound, the first element of which means shining or splendid, from Proto-Germanic
*austr-, from PIE *ausr- (see aurora), which is also, via sunrise, the root of the Latin word for
east.


poontang (n.)

sex with a woman; woman regarded as a sex object; female genitalia, c.1910, of uncertain origin,
probably via New Orleans Creole, from French putain prostitute, from Old French pute whore (cognate
with Spanish and Proven&ccedil;al puta), probably from fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus girl (source of
Old Italian putta girl), from Latin putus (originally pure, bright, splendid).    But also possibly
from or influenced by Old French put, from Latin putidus stinking on notion of the foulness of
harlotry [Buck], or for more literal reasons (among the 16c.-17c. slang terms for whore in English
were polecat, which might also be a pun, and fling-stink). Shortened form poon is recorded from
1969.


noble (adj.)

c.1200, illustrious, distinguished; worthy of honor or respect, from Old French noble of noble
bearing or birth, from Latin nobilis well-known, famous, renowned; excellent, superior, splendid;
high-born, of superior birth, earlier *gnobilis, literally knowable, from gnoscere to come to know,
from PIE root *gno- to know (see know). The prominent Roman families, which were well known,
provided most of the Republic's public officials.    Meaning distinguished by rank, title, or birth
is first recorded late 13c. Sense of having lofty character, having high moral qualities is from
c.1600. A noble gas (1902) is so called for its inactivity or intertness; a use of the word that had
been applied in Middle English to precious stones, metals, etc., of similar quality (late 14c.),
from the sense of having admirable properties (c.1300).


katzenjammer (n.)

1849, a hangover, American English colloquial, from German katzen, comb. form of katze cat (see cat
(n.)) + jammer distress, wailing (see yammer). Hence, any unpleasant reaction (1897).    Pleasure
can intoxicate, passion can inebriate, success can make you quite as drunk as champagne. The waking
from these several stages of delights will bring the same result--Katzenjammer. In English you would
call it reaction; but whole pages of English cannot express the sick, empty, weary, vacant feeling
which is so concisely contained within these four German syllables. [Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine,
August 1884]   Katzenjammer Kids spectacularly naughty children is from title of comic strip first
drawn by German-born U.S. comic strip artist Rudolph Dirks (1877-1968) in 1897 for the New York
Journal. It was temporarily de-Germanized during World War I:    THE SHENANIGAN KIDS is the new
American name for the original Katzenjammer Kids. Although the original name and idea were pure
Holland Dutch, some people may have had the mistaken impression that they were of Germanic origin,
and hence the change. It is the same splendid comic as in the past. [International Feature Service
advertisement in Editor &amp; Publisher, July 6, 1918]


grand (adj.)

late 14c., grant large, big (early 12c. in surnames), from Anglo-French graunt and directly from Old
French grant, grand (10c.) large, tall; grown-up; great, powerful, important; strict, severe;
extensive; numerous, from Latin grandis big, great; full, abundant, also full-grown; figuratively
strong, powerful, weighty, severe (perhaps cognate with Greek brenthyomai to swagger, be haughty).
It supplanted magnus in Romanic languages; in English with a special sense of imposing. The
connotations of noble, sublime, lofty, dignified, etc., were in Latin. As a general term of
admiration, magnificent, splendid, from 1816. Related: Grander; grandest.    The use of grand- in
compounds, with the sense of a generation older than, or younger than, is first attested c.1200, in
Anglo-French graund dame grandmother. Latin and Greek had similar usages.   Grand jury is late 15c.
Grand piano from 1797. The grand tour of the principal sites of continental Europe, as part of a
gentleman's education, is attested by that name from 1660s. The Grand Canyon was so called 1871 by
Maj. John Wesley Powell, scientific adventurer, who explored it; earlier it had been known as Big
Canyon.


proud (adj.)

late Old English  prud, prute excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, probably from Old French prud,
oblique case of adjective prouz brave, valiant (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme brave
man), from Late Latin prode advantageous, profitable (source also of Italian prode valiant), a back-
formation from Latin prodesse be useful, from pro- before, for, instead of (see pro-) + esse to be
(see essence). Also see pride (n.), prowess.    Meaning elated by some act, fact, or thing is from
mid-13c. To do (someone) proud attested by 1819. Related: Proudness. The -d- in prodesse is probably
due to the influence of forms like red-eo-, 'I go back,' red-imo- 'I buy back,' etc. [OED]. The Old
English form with -te probably is from or influenced by pride.    The sense of have a high opinion
of oneself, not found in Old French, might reflect the Anglo-Saxons' opinion of the Norman knights
who called themselves proud. Old Norse pru&eth;r, probably from the same French source, had only the
sense brave, gallant, magnificent, stately (compare Icelandic pru&eth;ur, Middle Swedish prudh,
Middle Danish prud). Likewise a group of pride words in the Romance languages -- such as French
orgueil, Italian orgoglio, Spanish orgullo -- are borrowings from Germanic, where they had positive
senses (Old High German urgol distinguished).    Most Indo-European languages use the same word for
proud in its good and bad senses, but in many the bad sense seems to be the earlier one. The usual
way to form the word is by some compound of terms for over or high and words for heart, mood,
thought, or appearance; such as Greek hyperephanos, literally over-appearing; Gothic
hauh&thorn;uhts, literally high-conscience. Old English had ofermodig over-moody (mood in Anglo-
Saxon was a much more potent word than presently) and heahheort high-heart. Words for proud in other
Indo-European languages sometimes reflect a physical sense of being swollen or puffed up; such as
Welsh balch, probably from a root meaning to swell, and Modern Greek kamari, from ancient Greek
kamarou furnish with a vault or arched cover, with a sense evolution via make an arch, to puff out
the chest, to be puffed up (compare English slang chesty).


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


