sprang

past tense of spring (v.).


Pegasus

winged horse in Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Pegasos, usually said to be from
pege fountain, spring; a well fed by a spring (plural pegai), especially in springs of Ocean, near
which Medusa was said to have been killed by Perseus (Pegasus sprang from her blood). But this may
be folk etymology, and the ending of the word indicates non-Greek origin. Advances since the 1990s
in the study of the Luwians, neighbors of the Hittites in ancient Anatolia, show a notable
convergence of the Greek name with Piha&#353;&#353;a&#353;&#353;i, the name of a Luwian weather-god:
the mythological figure of Pegasus carrying the lightning and thunderbolt of Zeus, ... is likely to
represent an avatar of the Luwian Storm-God of Lightning .... [Alice Mouton, et al., eds., Luwian
Identities, 2013]


scan (v.)

late 14c., mark off verse in metric feet, from Late Latin scandere to scan verse, originally, in
classical Latin, to climb, rise, mount (the connecting notion is of the rising and falling rhythm of
poetry), from PIE *skand- to spring, leap, climb (cognates: Sanskrit skandati hastens, leaps, jumps;
Greek skandalon stumbling block; Middle Irish sescaind he sprang, jumped, sceinm a bound, jump).
Missing -d in English is probably from confusion with suffix -ed (see lawn (n.1)). Sense of look at
closely, examine minutely (as one does when counting metrical feet in poetry) first recorded 1540s.
The (opposite) sense of look over quickly, skim is first attested 1926. Related: Scanned; scanning.


spring (v.)

Old English springan to leap, burst forth, fly up; spread, grow, (class III strong verb; past tense
sprang, past participle sprungen), from Proto-Germanic *sprengan (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian
springa, Middle Dutch springhen, Dutch Related: springen, Old Saxon and Old High German springan,
German springen), from PIE *sprengh-, nasalized form of root *spergh- to move, hasten, spring
(cognates: Sanskrit sprhayati desires eagerly, Greek sperkhesthai to hurry).    In Middle English,
it took on the role of causal sprenge, from Old English sprengan (as still in to spring a trap,
etc.). Meaning to cause to work or open, by or as by a spring mechanism, is from 1828.Meaning to
announce suddenly (usually with on) is from 1876. Meaning to release (from imprisonment) is from
1900. Slang meaning to pay (for a treat, etc.) is recorded from 1906.


