sprightly (adj.)

1590s, from spright, an early 16c. variant of sprite, + -ly (1). Related: Sprightliness.


pleasantry (n.)

sprightly humor in conversation, 1650s, from French plaisanterie joke, jest; joking, jesting, from
plaisant (see pleasant). Related: Pleasantries.


jaunty (adj.)

1660s, elegant, stylish, from French gentil nice, pleasing, in Old French noble (see gentle). Form
reflects attempt to render the French pronunciation of gentil. Meaning easy and sprightly in manner
first attested 1670s. Related: Jauntily; jauntiness.


spry (adj.)

1746, active, nimble, vigorous, lively, dialectal, perhaps a shortening and alteration of sprightly
[Barnhart], or from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse spr&aelig;kr, dialectal Swedish sprygg
brisk, active), from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, from PIE root *(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (see
sparse).


mercurial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the planet Mercury (see Mercury). Meaning sprightly, volatile, quick
(1590s) is from supposed qualities of those born under the planet Mercury (they also are the
qualities of the god Mercury), probably also partly by association with the qualities of
quicksilver. A variant in this sense was mercurious (1590s). Related: Mercurially; mercuriality.


rhapsody (n.)

1540s, epic poem, from Middle French rhapsodie, from Latin rhapsodia, from Greek rhapsoidia verse
composition, recitation of epic poetry; a book, a lay, a canto, from rhapsodos reciter of epic
poems, literally one who stitches or strings songs together, from rhaptein to stitch, sew, weave
(see wrap (v.)) + oide song (see ode). Meaning exalted enthusiastic feeling or expression is from
1630s. Meaning sprightly musical composition is first recorded 1850s.


vegetable (adj.)

early 15c., capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous; also neither animal nor mineral, of the
plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant, from Old French vegetable living, fit to live, and
directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis growing, flourishing, from Late Latin vegetabilis
animating, enlivening, from Latin vegetare to enliven, from vegetus vigorous, enlivened, active,
sprightly, from vegere to be alive, active, to quicken, from PIE *weg- (2) be strong, lively, source
of watch (v.), vigor, velocity, and possibly witch (see wake (v.)). The meaning resembling that of a
vegetable, dull, uneventful; having life such as a plant has is attested from 1854 (see vegetable
(n.)).


quick (adj.)

Old English cwic living, alive, animate, and figuratively, of mental qualities, rapid, ready, from
Proto-Germanic *kwikwaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian quik, Old Norse kvikr living, alive,
Dutch kwik lively, bright, sprightly, Old High German quec lively, German keck bold), from PIE root
*gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Sense of lively, swift developed by late 12c., on notion of full of
life.    NE swift or the now more common fast may apply to rapid motion of any duration, while in
quick (in accordance with its original sense of 'live, lively') there is a notion of 'sudden' or
'soon over.' We speak of a fast horse or runner in a race, a quick starter but not a quick horse. A
somewhat similar feeling may distinguish NHG schnell and rasch or it may be more a matter of local
preference. [Buck]    Of persons, mentally active, from late 15c. Also in Middle English used of
soft soils, gravel pits, etc. where the ground is shifting and yielding (mid-14c., compare
quicksand). As an adverb from c.1300. To be quick about something is from 1937. Quick buck is from
1946, American English. Quick-change artist (1886) originally was an actor expert in playing
different roles in the same performance of a show. Quick-witted is from 1520s.


