sprout (n.)

shoot of a plant, sprout; a twig, Old English sprota, from the verb (see sprout (v.)). Cognate with
Middle Dutch spruyte, Dutch spruite a sprout, Old Norse sproti, German Spro&#223;.


sprout (v.)

Old English -sprutan (in asprutan to sprout), from Proto-Germanic *sprut- (cognates: Old Saxon
sprutan, Old Frisian spruta, Middle Dutch spruten, Old High German spriozan, German sprie&#223;en to
sprout), from PIE *spreud-, extended form of root *sper- (4) to strew (cognates: Greek speirein to
scatter, spora a scattering, sowing, sperma sperm, seed, literally that which is scattered; Old
English spreawlian to sprawl, -spr&aelig;dan to spread, spreot pole; Armenian sprem scatter; Old
Lithuanian sprainas staring, opening wide one's eyes; Lettish sprie&#382;u I span, I measure).
Related: Sprouted; sprouting.


broccoli (n.)

1690s, from Italian broccoli, plural of broccolo a sprout, cabbage sprout, diminutive of brocco
shoot, protruding tooth, small nail (see brocade (n.)).


germination (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin germinationem (nominative germinatio) sprouting forth, budding, noun of action
from past participle stem of germinare to sprout, put forth shoots, from germen (genitive germinis)
a sprout or bud (see germ).


spritz (v.)

1917, from Yiddish or directly from German spritzen to squirt, from Middle High German spr&#252;tzen
to squirt, sprout, from Proto-Germanic *sprut- (see sprout (v.)). Spritzer glass of wine mixed with
carbonated water is from 1961.


sprit (n.)

Old English spreot pole, pike, spear, originally a sprout, shoot, branch, from Proto-Germanic
*sprut- (see sprout (v.)). Cognate with Middle Dutch spriet, Middle Low German spryet, German
Spriet, North Frisian sprit. Restricted nautical sense of diagonal spar from a mast is from 14c.
Related: Spritsail.


browse (v.)

mid-15c., feed on buds, from Middle French brouster, from Old French broster to sprout, bud, from
brost young shoot, twig, probably from Proto-Germanic *brust- bud, shoot, from PIE *bhreus- to
swell, sprout (see breast (n.)). Lost its final -t in English on the mistaken notion that the letter
was a past participle inflection. Figurative extension to peruse (books) is 1870s, American English.
Related: Browsed; browsing.


germ (n.)

mid-15c., bud, sprout; 1640s, rudiment of a new organism in an existing one, from Middle French
germe germ (of egg); bud, seed, fruit; offering, from Latin germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud,
perhaps from PIE root *gen- to beget, bear (see genus). The older sense is preserved in wheat germ
and germ of an idea; sense of seed of a disease first recorded 1796 in English; that of harmful
microorganism dates from 1871. Germ warfare recorded from 1920.


verdure (n.)

late 14c., fresh green color, from Old French verdure greenness, greenery, green fields, herbs, from
verd, variant of vert green (12c.), from Latin viridis (source of Spanish, Italian verde), related
to virere be green, of unknown origin. Perhaps ultimately from a root meaning growing plant and
cognate with Lithuanian veisti propagate, Old Norse visir bud, sprout, Old English wise sprout,
stalk, etc. Meaning green plants, vegetation is attested from c.1400.


burgeon (v.)

early 14c., grow, sprout, blossom, from Anglo-French burjuner, Old French borjoner to bud, sprout,
from borjon a bud, shoot, pimple (Modern French bourgeon), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar
Latin *burrionem (nominative *burrio), from Late Latin burra flock of wool, itself of uncertain
origin. Some sources (Kitchin, Gamillscheg) say either the French word or the Vulgar Latin one is
from Germanic. The English verb is perhaps instead a native development from burjoin (n.) a bud
(c.1300), from Old French. Related: Burgeoned; burgeoning.


spear (n.2)

sprout of a plant, 1640s, earlier church spire (c.1500); variant of spire (n.).


blastula (n.)

embryonic state, 1875, Modern Latin, from Greek blastos sprout, germ + diminutive ending -ula.


outcrop (n.)

1805, in geology, exposure of rocks at the surface, from out + crop (n.) in its sense of sprout,
head.


surculation (n.)

act of pruning, 1660s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin surculare chear of shoots
or twigs, from surculus tender young shoot, twig, sprout, sucker.


clone (n.)

1903, in botany, from Greek klon a twig, spray, related to klados sprout, young branch, offshoot of
a plant, possibly from PIE root *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt). Figurative use by 1978.


crop (n.)

Old English cropp bird's craw, also head or top of a sprout or herb. The common notion is
protuberance. Cognate with Old High German kropf, Old Norse kroppr. Meaning harvest product is
c.1300, probably through the verbal meaning cut off the top of a plant (c.1200).


blasto-

before vowels blast-, word-forming element used in scientific compounds to mean germ, bud, from
Greek blasto-, comb. form of blastos sprout, germ, of unknown origin.


blastema (n.)

1849, Modern Latin, from Greek blastema offspring, offshoot, from stem of blastanein to shoot forth,
from blastos sprout, germ, of unknown origin. Related: Blastemal.


pullulate (v.)

1610s, from Latin pullulatus, past participle of pullulare put forth, grow, sprout, shoot up, come
forth, from pullulus, diminutive of pullus young animal (see foal (n.)). Related: Pullulated;
pullulating.


gymnosperm (n.)

1830, from French gymnosperme and Modern Latin gymnospermus (17c.), literally naked seed (i.e., not
enclosed in an ovary), from gymno- + sperma seed (see sprout).


sprat (n.)

small European herring, 1590s, variant of sprot (c.1300), from Old English sprott a small herring,
according to Klein related to Dutch sprot and probably connected to sprout (v.).


spurt (v.)

to gush out, squirt, 1560s, variant of spirt, perhaps cognate with Middle High German sp&uuml;rzen
to spit, and spr&uuml;tzen to squirt (see sprout (v.)). Related: Spurted; spurting. The noun in this
sense is attested from 1775.


spray (v.)

sprinkle liquid in drops, 1520s, from Middle Dutch sprayen, from Proto-Germanic *sprewjan (cognates:
German spr&uuml;hen to sparkle, drizzle, Spreu chaff, literally that which flies about), from
extended form of PIE root *sper- (4) to sow, scatter (see sprout (v.)). Related: Sprayed; spraying.


brisket (n.)

mid-14c., brusket, perhaps from Old French bruschet, with identical sense of the English word, or
from Old Norse brjosk gristle, cartilage (related to brjost breast) or Danish bryske or Middle High
German brusche lump, swelling; from PIE *bhreus- to swell, sprout (see breast (n.)).


thallus (n.)

1829, Latin, from Greek thallos green shoot, young branch, twig, related to thalia abundance, thalos
scion, child, ultimately from PIE root *dhal- to bloom (cognates: Armenian dalar green, fresh,
Albanian dal' I sprout, Old Irish duilesc, a type of algae).


sprawl (v.)

Old English spreawlian move convulsively, with cognates in the Scandinavian languages (such as
Norwegian sprala, Danish spr&#230;lle) and North Frisian spraweli, probably ultimately from PIE root
*sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)). Meaning to spread out is from c.1300. That of to spread or
stretch in a careless manner is attested from 1540s; of things, from 1745. Related: Sprawled;
sprawling.


germinal (adj.)

1808, from Modern Latin germinalis in the germ, from Latin germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud,
sprig, offshoot (see germ) + -al (1).


sporo-

before vowels spor-, word-forming element meaning spore, from comb. form of Greek spora a seed, a
sowing, related to sporas scattered, dispersed, sporos sowing, and speirein to sow, from PIE *spor-,
variant of root *sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).


freckle (n.)

late 14c., also frecken, probably from Old Norse freknur (plural) freckles (cognates: Icelandic
frekna, Danish fregne, Swedish fr&auml;gne freckle), from PIE *(s)preg- to jerk, scatter (see sprout
(v.)). Related: Freckles.


spore (n.)

reproductive body in flowerless plants corresponding to the seeds of flowering ones, 1836, from
Modern Latin spora, from Greek spora a seed, a sowing, seed-time, related to sporas scattered,
dispersed, sporos a sowing, and speirein to sow, scatter, from PIE *spor-, variant of root *sper-
(4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).


jet (v.)

early 15c., to prance, strut, swagger, from Middle French jeter to throw, thrust, from Late Latin
iectare, abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc., in place of Latin iactare toss about,
frequentative of iacere to throw, cast, from PIE root *ye- to do (cognates: Greek iemi, ienai to
send, throw; Hittite ijami I make). Meaning to sprout or spurt forth is from 1690s. Related: Jetted;
jetting.


diaspora (n.)

1876, from Greek diaspora dispersion, from diaspeirein to scatter about, disperse, from dia- about,
across (see dia-) + speirein to scatter (see sprout). The Greek word was used in Septuagint in Deut.
xxviii:25. A Hebrew word for it is galuth exile. Related: Diasporic.


maroon (v.)

put ashore on a desolate island or coast, 1724 (implied in marooning), earlier to be lost in the
wild (1690s); from maron (n.) fugitive black slave in the jungles of W.Indies and Dutch Guyana
(1660s), earlier symeron (1620s), from French marron, said to be a corruption of Spanish cimmaron
wild, untamed, from Old Spanish cimarra thicket, probably from cima summit, top (from Latin cyma
sprout), with a notion of living wild in the mountains. Related: Marooned.


german (adj.)

of the same parents or grandparents, c.1300, from Old French germain closely related (12c.), from
Latin germanus full, own (of brothers and sisters); one's own brother; genuine, real, related to
germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud, dissimilated from PIE *gen(e)-men-, from root *gene- to give
birth, beget (see genus). Your cousin-german (also first cousin) is the son or daughter of an uncle
or aunt; your children and your first cousin's are second cousins to one another; to you, your first
cousin's children are first cousin once removed.


scion (n.)

c.1300, a shoot or twig, especially one for grafting, from Old French sion, cion descendant; shoot,
twig; offspring (12c., Modern French scion, Picard chion), of uncertain origin. OED rejects
derivation from Old French scier to saw. Perhaps a diminutive from Frankish *kid-, from Proto-
Germanic *kidon-, from PIE *geie- to sprout, split, open (see chink (n.1)). Figurative use is
attested from 1580s in English; meaning an heir, a descendant is from 1814, from the family tree
image.


lead (v.1)

to guide, Old English l&aelig;dan cause to go with one, lead, guide, conduct, carry; sprout forth;
bring forth, pass (one's life), causative of li&eth;an to travel, from Proto-Germanic *laidjan
(cognates: Old Saxon lithan, Old Norse li&eth;a to go, Old High German ga-lidan to travel, Gothic
ga-lei&thorn;an to go), from PIE *leit- to go forth.    Meaning to be in first place is from late
14c. Sense in card playing is from 1670s. Related: Led; leading. Lead-off commencement, beginning
attested from 1879; lead-in introduction, opening is from 1928.


sperm (n.)

male seminal fluid, late 14c., probably from Old French esperme seed, sperm (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin sperma seed, semen, from Greek sperma the seed of plants, also of animals, literally that
which is sown, from speirein to sow, scatter, from PIE *sper-mn-, from root *sper- (4) to strew (see
sprout (v.)). Sperm bank is attested from 1963. For sperm whale see spermaceti.


tout (v.)

1700, thieves' cant, to act as a lookout, spy on, from Middle English tuten to peep, peer, probably
from a variant of Old English totian to stick out, peep, peer, from Proto-Germanic *tut- project
(cognates: Dutch tuit sprout, snout, Middle Dutch tute nipple, pap, Middle Low German tute horn,
funnel, Old Norse tota teat, toe of a shoe). The sense developed to look out for jobs, votes,
customers, etc., to try to get them (1731), then praise highly in an attempt to sell (1920).
Related: Touted; touting.


breast (n.)

Old English breost breast, bosom; mind, thought, disposition, from Proto-Germanic *breustam breast
(cognates: Old Saxon briost, Old Frisian briast, Old Norse brjost, Dutch borst, German brust, Gothic
brusts), perhaps literally swelling and from PIE root *bhreus- to swell, sprout (cognates: Middle
Irish bruasach having a broad, strong chest, Old Irish bruinne breast). The spelling conforms to the
Scottish and northern England dialectal pronunciation. Figurative sense of seat of the emotions was
in Old English.


spire (n.)

Old English spir a sprout, shoot, spike, blade, tapering stalk of grass, from Proto-Germanic *spiraz
(cognates: Old Norse spira a stalk, slender tree, Dutch spier shoot, blade of grass, Middle Low
German spir a small point or top), from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)). Meaning tapering
top of a tower or steeple first recorded 1590s (a sense attested in Middle Low German since late
14c. and also found in the Scandinavian cognates).


chink (n.1)

a split, crack, 1530s, with parasitic -k + Middle English chine (and replacing this word) fissure,
narrow valley, from Old English cinu, cine fissure, related to cinan to crack, split, gape, common
Germanic (compare Old Saxon and Old High German kinan, Gothic uskeinan, German keimen to germinate;
Middle Dutch kene, Old Saxon kin, German Keim germ; ), from PIE root *geie- to sprout, split open.
The connection being in the notion of bursting open.


grass (n.)

Old English gr&aelig;s, g&aelig;rs herb, plant, grass, from Proto-Germanic grasan (cognates: Old
Norse, Old Saxon, Dutch, Old High German, German, Gothic gras, Swedish gr&auml;s), from PIE *ghros-
young shoot, sprout, from root *ghre- to grow, become green (related to grow and green).    As a
color name (especially grass-green, Old English gr&aelig;sgrene) by c.1300. Sense of marijuana is
first recorded 1938, American English. Hawaiian grass skirt attested from 1937; keep off the grass
by 1850.


spread (v.)

c.1200, to stretch out, to lay out; diffuse, disseminate (transitive), also to advance over a wide
area (intransitive); probably from Old English spr&aelig;dan to spread, stretch forth, extend
(especially in tospr&aelig;dan to spread out, and gespr&aelig;dung spreading), from Proto-Germanic
*spreit- (cognates: Danish sprede, Old Swedish spreda, Middle Dutch spreiden, Old High German and
German spreiten to spread), extended form of PIE root *sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).
Reflexive sense of to be outspread is from c.1300; that of to extend, expand is attested from mid-
14c. Transitive sense of make (something) wide is from late 14c. As an adjective from 1510s.
Related: Spreading.


plant (n.)

Old English plante young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, from Latin planta sprout, shoot, cutting
(source of Spanish planta, French plante), perhaps from *plantare to drive in with the feet, push
into the ground with the feet, from planta sole of the foot, from nasalized form of PIE *plat- to
spread, flat (see place (n.)).    Broader sense of any vegetable life, vegetation generally is first
recorded 1550s. Most extended usages are from the verb, on the notion of something planted; such as
construction for an industrial process, 1789, at first with reference to the set-up of machinery,
later also the building; also slang meaning a spy (1812). Many of these follow similar developments
in the French form of the word. German Pflanz, Irish cland, Welsh plant are from Latin.


