spurious (adj.)

1590s, born out of wedlock, from Latin spurius illegitimate, false (source also of Italian spurio,
Spanish espurio), from spurius (n.) illegitimate child, probably from Etruscan spural public. Sense
of having an irregular origin, not properly constituted is from c.1600; that of false, sham is from
1610s; of writing, etc., not proceeding from the source pretended, 1620s. Related: Spuriously;
spuriousness.


bogus

1838, counterfeit money, spurious coin, American English, apparently from a slang word applied
(according to some sources first in Ohio in 1827) to a counterfeiter's apparatus.    One bogus or
machine impressing dies on the coin, with a number of dies, engraving tools, bank bill paper,
spurious coin, &amp;c.; &amp;c.; making in all a large wagon load, was taken into possession by the
attorney general of Lower Canada. [Niles' Register, Sept. 7, 1833, quoting from Concord, New
Hampshire, Statesman, Aug. 24]     Some trace this to tantrabobus, also tantrabogus, a late 18c.
colloquial Vermont word for any odd-looking object, in later 19c. use the devil, which might be
connected to tantarabobs, recorded as a Devonshire name for the devil. Others trace it to the same
source as bogey (n.1).


goldbrick (n.)

shirker, 1914, World War I armed forces slang, from earlier verb meaning to swindle, cheat (1902)
from the old con game of selling spurious gold bricks (attested by 1882).


snide (adj.)

1859, thieves' slang, counterfeit, sham, bad, spurious, of unknown origin. Of persons, cunning,
sharp, from 1883. Sense of sneering is first attested 1933, perhaps via sense of hypocrisy,
malicious gossip (1902). Related: Sneeringly.


pseudo (n.)

late 14c., false or spurious thing; see pseudo-. As an adjective in this sense from mid-15c. In
modern use, of persons, pretentious, insincere, from 1945; as a noun from 1959. Related: Pseudish.


darkling

in the dark, mid-15c., from dark (n.) + now-obsolete adverbial ending -ling.    But having nothing
to do with the participial -ing it does not mean growing dark &amp;c.; from the mistaken notion that
it is a participle spring both the misuse of the word itself and the spurious verb darkle. [Fowler]


rum (adj.)

excellent, fine, good, valuable, 1560s, from rome fine (1560s), said to be from Romany rom male,
husband (see Romany). E.g. rum kicks Breeches of gold or silver brocade, or richly laced with gold
or silver [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785].    A very common 16c. cant word, by 1774
it also had come to mean odd, strange, bad, spurious, perhaps because it had been so often used
approvingly by rogues in reference to one another. This was the main sense after c.1800.


genuine (adj.)

1590s, natural, not acquired, from Latin genuinus native, natural, from root of gignere beget (see
genus), perhaps influenced in form by contrasting adulterinus spurious. [Alternative etymology is
from Latin genu knee, from a supposed ancient custom of a father acknowledging paternity of a
newborn by placing it on his knee.] Meaning really proceeding from its reputed source is from 1660s.
Related: Genuinely; genuineness.


Limburger (n.)

1870, short for Limburger cheese (1817), from Limburg, province in northeast Belgium, where the
cheese is made.  Some frauds a few years ago started a Limburger cheese factory down in Keyport, New
Jersey, but the imposition was soon exposed. A man could come within 300 yards of the spurious
article without being knocked down, and as the smell never had any effect on the town clock the
business was soon discontinued. [John E. Boyd, The Berkeley Heroine and Others Stories]    The place
name is from Germanic *lindo lime tree + *burg fortification.


sophomore (n.)

1680s, student in the second year of university study, literally arguer, altered from sophumer
(1650s, from sophume, archaic variant form of sophism), probably by influence of folk etymology
derivation from Greek sophos wise + moros foolish, dull. The original reference might be to the
dialectic exercises that formed a large part of education in the middle years. At Oxford and
Cambridge, a sophister (from sophist with spurious -er as in philosopher) was a second- or third-
year student (what Americans would call a junior might be a senior sophister).


fault (n.)

late 13c., faute, deficiency, from Old French faute (12c.) opening, gap; failure, flaw, blemish;
lack, deficiency, from Vulgar Latin *fallita a shortcoming, falling, noun use of fem. past
participle, from Latin falsus deceptive, feigned, spurious, past participle of fallere deceive,
disappoint (see fail (v.)).    The -l- was restored 16c., probably in imitation of Latin, but was
not pronounced till 18c. Sense of physical defect is from early 14c.; that of moral culpability is
first recorded late 14c. Geological sense is from 1796. The use in tennis (c.1600) is closer to the
etymological sense.


main line (n.)

principal line of a railway, 1841; meaning affluent area of residence is by 1917, originally (with
capitals) that of Philadelphia, from the main line of the Pennsylvania Railroad which added local
stops to a string of backwater towns west of the city late 19c. that helped turn them into
fashionable suburbs.    The Main Line, Philadelphia's most famous suburban district, was
deliberately conceived in the 1870's and 1880's by the [Pennsylvania] Railroad, which built high-
toned housing developments, ran hotels, more or less forced its executives to plunk their estates
out there, and created a whole series of somewhat spurious Welsh towns along the railroad tracks.
... Now everybody assumes these all date from 1682, like the Robertses; but as Chestnut Hill people
like to say, nobody but Welsh peasants lived on the Main Line till the Railroad built it up.
[Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial Philadelphians, 1963]    The original station stops were, in order
out from the city, Overbrook, Merion, Narberth, Wynnewood, Ardmore, Haverford, Bryn Mawr, Paoli. The
train line for commuters along it is the Paoli Local.


people (n.)

late 13c., humans, persons in general, from Anglo-French people, Old French peupel people,
population, crowd; mankind, humanity, from Latin populus a people, nation; body of citizens; a
multitude, crowd, throng, of unknown origin, possibly from Etruscan. The Latin word also is the
source of Spanish pueblo, Italian popolo. In English, it displaced native folk.     Meaning body of
persons comprising a community first recorded late 13c. in Anglo-French; meaning common people,
masses (as distinguished from the nobility) first recorded c.1300 in Anglo-French. Meaning one's own
tribe, group, etc. is from late 14c. The word was adopted after c.1920 by Communist totalitarian
states to give a spurious sense of populism to their governments. Legal phrase The People vs., in
U.S. cases of prosecution under certain laws, dates from 1801. People of the Book those whose
religion entails adherence to a book of divine revelation (1834) translates Arabic Ahl al-Kitab.


picture (n.)

early 15c., drawing, painting, from Latin pictura painting, from pictus, past participle of pingere
to make pictures, to paint, to embroider, (see paint (v.)). Picture window is from 1938. Picture
post-card first recorded 1899. Phrase every picture tells a story first attested 1900, in
advertisements for an illustrated life of Christ. To be in (or out of) the picture in the figurative
sense dates to 1900.    Expression a picture is worth a thousand words, attested from 1918, probably
was from the publication trade (the notion that a picture was worth 1,000 words is in printers'
publications by 1911). The phrase also was in use in the form worth a million words, the form used
by American newspaper editor Arthur Brisbane (1864-1936) in an editorial much-read c.1916 titled
What is a Good Newspaper in the New York Evening Journal. In part it read, After news and humor come
good pictures. In this day of hurry we learn through the eye, and one picture may be worth a million
words. It seems to have emerged into general use via the medium of advertising (which scaled down
the number and also gave the expression its spurious origin story as a Japanese proverb or some such
thing, by 1919). Earlier various acts or deeds (and in one case the arrow) were said to be worth a
thousand words.


art (n.)

early 13c., skill as a result of learning or practice, from Old French art (10c.), from Latin artem
(nominative ars) work of art; practical skill; a business, craft, from PIE *ar-ti- (cognates:
Sanskrit rtih manner, mode; Greek arti just, artios complete, suitable, artizein to prepare; Latin
artus joint; Armenian arnam make; German art manner, mode), from root *ar- fit together, join (see
arm (n.1)).    In Middle English usually with a sense of skill in scholarship and learning (c.1300),
especially in the seven sciences, or liberal arts. This sense remains in Bachelor of Arts, etc.
Meaning human workmanship (as opposed to nature) is from late 14c. Sense of cunning and trickery
first attested c.1600. Meaning skill in creative arts is first recorded 1610s; especially of
painting, sculpture, etc., from 1660s. Broader sense of the word remains in artless.   Fine arts,
those which appeal to the mind and the imagination first recorded 1767. Expression art for art's
sake (1824) translates French l'art pour l'art. First record of art critic is from 1847. Arts and
crafts decorative design and handcraft first attested in the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society,
founded in London, 1888.    Supreme art is a traditional statement of certain heroic and religious
truths, passed on from age to age, modified by individual genius, but never abandoned. The revolt of
individualism came because the tradition had become degraded, or rather because a spurious copy had
been accepted in its stead. [William Butler Yeats]


