squat (adj.)

early 15c., crouch on the heels, in a squatting position, from squat (v.)). Sense of short, thick
dates from 1620s.


squat (n.)

c.1400, bump, heavy fall, from squat (v.). Meaning posture of one who squats is from 1570s; that of
act of squatting is from 1580s. Slang noun sense of nothing at all first attested 1934, probably
suggestive of squatting to defecate. Weight-lifting sense is from 1954.


squatter (n.)

settler who occupies land without legal title, 1788, agent noun from squat (v.); in reference to
paupers or homeless people in uninhabited buildings, it is recorded from 1880.


squat (v.)

mid-14c., to crush; early 15c., crouch on the heels, from Old French esquatir, escatir compress,
press down, lay flat, crush, from es- out (see ex-) + Old French quatir press down, flatten, from
Vulgar Latin *coactire press together, force, from Latin coactus, past participle of cogere to
compel, curdle, collect (see cogent). Meaning to settle on land without any title or right is from
1800. Related: Squatted; squatting.


absquatulate (v.)

1837, Facetious U.S. coinage [Weekley], perhaps based on a mock-Latin negation of squat to settle.
Said to have been used by the U.S. Western character Nimrod Wildfire in the play The Kentuckian, as
re-written by British author William B. Bernard and staged in London in 1833. Related:
Absquatulated; absquatulating.


thaught (n.)

rower's bench, 1620s, alteration of thoft, from Old English &thorn;ofte, from Proto-Germanic
*thufto- (cognates: Dutch doft, German ducht), from PIE *tupta-, from root *tup- to squat.


cower (v.)

c.1300, probably from Middle Low German *kuren lie in wait (Modern German kauern), or similar
Scandinavian words meaning to squat and to doze (such as Old Norse kura, Danish, Norwegian kure,
Swedish kura). Thus unrelated to coward. Related: Cowered; cowering.


hunker (v.)

to squat, crouch, 1720, Scottish, of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source such as
Old Norse huka to crouch, hoka, hokra to crawl. Hunker down, Southern U.S. dialectal phrase,
popularized c.1965, from northern British hunker haunch. Related: Hunkered; hunkering.


hawk (v.1)

to sell in the open, peddle, late 15c., back-formation from hawker itinerant vendor (c.1400), from
Middle Low German h&ouml;ken to peddle, carry on the back, squat, from Proto-Germanic *huk-.
Related: Hawked; hawking. Despite the etymological connection with stooping under a burden on one's
back, a hawker is technically distinguished from a peddler by use of a horse and cart or a van.


subside (v.)

1680s, of objects, to sink to the bottom, from Latin subsidere sit down, settle, sink, fall; remain;
crouch down, squat, from sub down (see sub-) + sidere to settle, related to sedere to sit (see
sedentary). Of liquid surfaces, to sink to a lower level, be reduced from 1706. Related: Subsided;
subsiding.


monitor (n.)

1540s, senior pupil at a school charged with keeping order, etc., from Latin monitor one who
reminds, admonishes, or checks, also an overseer, instructor, guide, teacher, agent noun from monere
to admonish, warn, advise, related to memini I remember, I am mindful of, and to mens mind, from PIE
root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).    The type of lizard so called because it is supposed to give
warning of crocodiles (1826). Meaning squat, slow-moving type of ironclad warship (1862) so called
from name of the first vessel of this design, chosen by the inventor, Swedish-born U.S. engineer
John Ericsson (1803-1889), because it was meant to admonish the Confederate leaders in the U.S.
Civil War. Broadcasting sense of a device to continuously check on the technical quality of a
transmission (1931) led to special sense of a TV screen displaying the picture from a particular
camera.


