squander (v.)

1580s (implied in squandering), to spend recklessly or prodigiously, of unknown origin; Shakespeare
used it in Merchant of Venice (1593) with a sense of to be scattered over a wide area. Squander-bug,
a British symbol of reckless extravagance and waste during war-time shortages, represented as a
devilish insect, was introduced 1943. In U.S., Louis Ludlow coined squanderlust (1935) for the
tendency of government bureaucracies to spend much money.


waste (v.)

c.1200, devastate, ravage, ruin, from Anglo-French and Old North French waster to waste, squander,
spoil, ruin (Old French gaster; Modern French g&#226;ter), altered (by influence of Frankish
*wostjan) from Latin vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate, waste (see vain). Related:
wasted; wasting.    The Germanic word also existed in Old English as westan to lay waste, ravage.
Spanish gastar, Italian guastare also are from Germanic. Meaning to lose strength or health; pine;
weaken is attested from c.1300; the sense of squander, spend or consume uselessly is first recorded
mid-14c.; meaning to kill is from 1964. Waste not, want not attested from 1778.


dilapidate (v.)

1560s, to bring a building to ruin, from Latin dilapidatus, past participle of dilapidare to
squander, waste, originally to throw stones, scatter like stones; see dilapidation. Perhaps the
English word is a back-formation from dilapidation.


ted (v.)

to spread (new-mown grass for drying), c.1300, from an unrecorded Old English *teddan or from a
Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse te&eth;ja to spread manure. Related to German verzetteln to
scatter, squander. Related: Tedding; tedder.


dissipate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissipatus, past participle of dissipare to spread abroad, scatter, disperse;
squander, disintegrate, from dis- apart (see dis-) + supare to throw, scatter, from PIE *swep- to
throw, sling, cast (cognates: Lithuanian supu to swing, rock, Old Church Slavonic supo to strew).
Related: Dissipated; dissipates; dissipating.


dilapidation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin dilapidationem (nominative dilapidatio) a squandering, noun of action
from past participle stem of Latin dilapidare throw away, squander, waste, literally pelt with
stones (thus ruin, destroy) or else scatter like stones, from dis- asunder (see dis-) + lapidare
throw stones at, from lapis (genitive lapidis) stone. Taken in Eng. in a more literal sense than was
usual in Latin [OED].


perdition (n.)

mid-14c., fact of being lost or destroyed, from Old French perdicion loss, calamity, perdition of
souls (11c.) and directly from Late Latin perditionem (nominative perditio) ruin, destruction, noun
of action from past participle stem of Latin perdere do away with, destroy; lose, throw away,
squander, from per- through (here perhaps with intensive or completive force, to destruction) + dare
to put (see date (n.1)). Special theological sense of condition of damnation, spiritual ruin, state
of souls in Hell (late 14c.) has gradually extinguished the general use of the word.


blow (v.1)

move air, Old English blawan blow, breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound a wind
instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;-anan (source of Old High German blaen, German bl&auml;hen), from PIE *bhle- to swell,
blow up (source of Latin flare to blow), possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).    Meaning to squander (of money) is from 1874. Sense of depart suddenly is from 1902. Slang
do fellatio on sense is from 1933, as blow (someone) off, originally among prostitutes (compare blow
job). This usage probably is not connected to the colloquial imprecation (1781, associated with
sailors, as in Popeye's well, blow me down!), which has past participle blowed. Meaning to spend
(money) foolishly and all at once is 1890s; that of bungle an opportunity is from 1943. To blow over
pass is from 1610s, originally of storms. To blow (someone's) mind was in use by 1967; there is a
song title Blow Your Mind released in a 1965 Mirawood recording by a group called The Gas Company.


