stamp (n.)

mid-15c., instrument for crushing, stamping tool, from stamp (v.). Especially instrument for making
impressions (1570s). Meaning downward thrust or blow with the foot, act of stamping is from 1580s.
Sense of official mark or imprint (to certify that duty has been paid on what has been printed or
written) dates from 1540s; transferred 1837 to designed, pre-printed adhesive labels issued by
governments to serve the same purpose as impressed stamps. German Stempel rubber stamp, brand,
postmark represents a diminutive form. Stamp-collecting is from 1862 (compare philately).


stamp (v.)

Old English stempan to pound in a mortar, from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stappa,
Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen to stamp with the
foot, beat, pound, German Stampfe pestle), from nasalized form of PIE root *stebh- to support, place
firmly on (cognates: Greek stembein to trample, misuse; see staff (n.)). The vowel altered in Middle
English, perhaps by influence of Scandinavian forms.    Sense of strike the foot forcibly downwards
is from mid-14c. The meaning impress or mark (something) with a die is first recorded 1550s. Italian
stampa stamp, impression, Spanish estampar to stamp, print, French &#233;tamper (13c., Old French
estamper) to stamp, impress are Germanic loan-words. Related: Stamped; stamping. To stamp out
originally was extinguish a fire by stamping on it; attested from 1851 in the figurative sense.
Stamping ground one's particular territory (1821) is from the notion of animals. A stamped addressed
envelope (1873) was one you enclosed in a letter to speed or elicit a reply.


stampede (n.)

1844 (earlier stampedo, 1839), A general scamper of animals on the Western prairies, generally
caused by a fright [Bartlett] from Mexican Spanish estampida, from Spanish, an uproar, from estamper
to stamp, press, pound, from Proven&ccedil;al estampier to stamp, from the same Germanic root that
yielded English stamp (v.). The political sense is first recorded 1846 (in reference to the U.S.
Democratic Party convention of 1844). As the name of an annual exhibition of cowboy skills in
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, it is attested from 1912.


tramp (v.)

late 14c., walk heavily, stamp, from Middle Low German trampen to stamp, from Proto-Germanic *tremp-
(cognates: Danish trampe, Swedish trampa to tramp, stamp, Gothic ana-trimpan to press upon), from
PIE *der- (1) to run, walk, step (see tread (v.)). Related: Tramped; tramping.


philately (n.)

stamp-collecting, 1865, from French philat&#233;lie, coined by French stamp collector Georges Herpin
(in Le Collectionneur de Timbres-poste, Nov. 15, 1864), from Greek phil- loving (see philo-) +
ateleia exemption from tax, the closest word Herpin could find in ancient Greek to the concept of
postage stamp (from a- without + telos tax; see toll (n.)). A reminder of the original function of
postage stamps, now often forgotten: the cost of letter-carrying formerly was paid by the recipient;
stamps indicated it had been pre-paid by the sender, thus the letters were carriage-free.    It is a
pity that for one of the most popular scientific pursuits one of the least popularly intelligible
names should have been found. [Fowler] Stampomania (1865) also was tried. Stamp-collecting is from
1862.  Related: Philatelic; philatelism; philatelist.


time-stamp (n.)

1888, from time (n.) + stamp (n.). As a verb by 1906. Related: Time-stamped.


sign (v.)

c.1300, to make the sign of the cross, from Old French signier to make a sign (to someone); to mark,
from Latin signare to set a mark upon, mark out, designate; mark with a stamp; distinguish, adorn;
figuratively to point out, signify, indicate, from signum (see sign (n.)). Sense of to mark, stamp
is attested from mid-14c.; that of to affix one's name is from late 15c. Meaning to communicate by
hand signs is recorded from 1700. Related: Signed; signing.


puncheon (n.2)

pointed tool for punching or piercing used by masons, also die for coining or seal-making, mid-14c.;
see punch (n.1). Meaning stamp, die is from c.1500, a specialized use.


thresh (v.)

Old English &thorn;rescan, &thorn;erscan, to beat, sift grain by trampling or beating, from Proto-
Germanic *threskan to thresh, originally to tread, to stamp noisily (cognates: Middle Dutch
derschen, Dutch dorschen, Old High German dreskan, German dreschen, Old Norse &thorn;reskja, Swedish
tr&#246;ska, Gothic &thorn;riskan), from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)).    The
basic notion is of men or oxen treading out wheat; later, with the advent of the flail, the word
acquired its modern extended sense of to knock, beat, strike. The original Germanic sense is
suggested by the use of the word in Romanic languages that borrowed it, such as Italian trescare to
prance, Old French treschier to dance, Spanish triscar to stamp the feet.


adhesive (n.)

1881, from adhesive (adj.). Originally of postage stamps (adhesive stamp is attested from 1840). Of
substances that cause to adhere by 1900.


stomp (v.)

1803, variant of stamp. Related: Stomped; stomping. Noun meaning lively social dance is recorded
from 1912 in jazz slang.


earmark (n.)

late 15c., from ear (n.1) + mark (n.1). Originally a cut or mark in the ear of sheep and cattle,
serving as a sign of ownership (also a punishment of certain criminals); first recorded 1570s in
figurative sense stamp of ownership.


commemorative (adj.)

1610s, from commemorate + -ive. As a noun meaning means of commemoration it is recorded from 1630s;
as short for commemorative postage stamp from 1916.


hallmark (n.)

1721, official stamp of purity in gold and silver articles, from Goldsmiths' Hall in London, site of
the assay office; see hall + mark (n.1). General sense of mark of quality first recorded 1864. As a
verb from 1773.


mint (v.)

to stamp metal to make coins, 1540s, from mint (n.2). Related: Minted; minting. Minter one who
stamps coins to create money is from early 12c.


postage (n.)

1580s, sending of mail by post; 1650s as cost of sending something by mail, from post (n.3) + -age.
Postage stamp is attested from 1840; they were recorded as being collected in albums by 1862.


piste (n.)

also pist, 1727, from French piste, from Latin pista (via) beaten (track), from pistus, past
participle of pinsere to pound, stamp (see pestle).


inculcate (v.)

1540s, from Latin inculcatus, past participle of inculcare force upon, stamp in, tread down, from
in- in (see in- (2)) + calcare to tread, press in, from calx (1) heel. Related: Inculcated;
inculcating.


lowbrow (n.)

also low-brow, person who is not intellectual, 1902, from low (adj.) + brow. Said to have been
coined by U.S. journalist Will Irwin (1873-1948). A low brow on a man as a sign of primitive
qualities was common in 19c. fiction, but it also was considered a mark of classical beauty in
women.    A low brow and not a very high one is considered beautiful in woman, whereas a high brow
and not a low one is the stamp of manhood. [Medical Review, June 2, 1894]    As an adjective from
1913.


anapest (n.)

also anapaest, two short syllables followed by a long one, 1670s, from Latin anapestus, from Greek
anapaistos struck back, rebounding, verbal adjective from anapaiein to strike back, from ana- back
(see ana-) + paiein to strike, from PIE *pau- to cut, strike, stamp (see pave). So called because it
reverses the dactyl.


cachet (n.)

1630s, Scottish borrowing of French cachet seal affixed to a letter or document (16c.), from Old
French dialectal cacher to press, crowd, from Latin coactare constrain (see cache). Meaning evolving
through (letter under) personal stamp (of the king) to prestige. Compare French lettre de cachet
letter under seal of the king.


impression (n.)

late 14c., mark produced by pressure, also image produced in the mind or emotions, from Old French
impression print, stamp; a pressing on the mind, from Latin impressionem (nominative impressio)
onset, attack, figuratively perception, literally a pressing into, from imprimere (see impress).
Meaning act or process of indenting is early 15c.; that of printing of a number of copies is from
1570s. Meaning belief, vague notion (as in under the impression) is from 1610s.


scotch (v.)

stamp out, crush, 1825, earlier make harmless for a time (1798; a sense that derives from an
uncertain reading of Macbeth III.ii.13), from scocchen to cut, score, gash, make an incision (early
15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from Anglo-French escocher, Old French cocher to notch,
nick, from coche a notch, groove, perhaps from Latin coccum berry of the scarlet oak, which appears
notched, from Greek kokkos. Related: Scotched; scotching.


impress (v.)

late 14c., have a strong effect on the mind or heart, from Latin impressus, past participle of
imprimere press into or upon, stamp, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
premere to press (see press (v.1)). Literal sense of  to apply with pressure, make a permanent image
in, indent, imprint is from early 15c. in English. Sense of to levy for military service is from
1590s, a meaning more from press (v.2). Related: Impressed; impressing.


pizza (n.)

1935, from Italian pizza, originally cake, tart, pie, of uncertain origin. The 1907 Vocabolario
Etimologico della Lingua Italiana reports it is said to be from dialectal pinza clamp (from Latin
pinsere to pound, stamp). Klein suggests a connection via loan-translation with Medieval Greek pitta
cake, pie, from Greek pitta pitch (cognate with Latin adjective piceus of pitch). See also pita.


pregnant (adj.2)

convincing, weighty, pithy, late 14c., cogent, convincing, compelling (of evidence, an argument,
etc.); sense of full of meaning is from c.1400. According to OED from Old French preignant, present
participle of preindre press, squeeze, stamp, crush, from earlier priembre, from Latin premere to
press (see press (v.1)). But Watkins has it from Latin praehendere to grasp, seize, and in Barnhart
it is from Latin praegnans with child, literally before birth and thus identical with pregnant
(adj.1).


stump (n.)

part of a tree trunk left in the ground after felling, mid-15c. (implied from late 13c. in
surnames); from mid-14c. as remaining part of a severed arm or leg; from or cognate with Middle Low
German stump (from adjective meaning mutilated, blunt, dull), Middle Dutch stomp stump, from Proto-
Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stumpr, Old High German stumph, German stumpf stump, German
Stummel piece cut off), from PIE *stebh- post, stem; to support  (see step (v.).


pave (v.)

early 14c., to cover (a street) with stones or other material, from Old French paver to pave (12c.),
perhaps a back-formation from Old French pavement or else from Vulgar Latin *pavare, from Latin
pavire to beat, ram, tread down, from PIE *pau- to cut, strike, stamp (cognates: Latin putare to
prune; Greek paiein to strike; Lithuanian piauju to cut, piuklas saw). Related: Paved; paving. The
figurative sense of make smooth (as in pave the way) is attested from 1580s.


signature (n.)

1530s, a kind of document in Scottish law, from Middle French signature (16c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin signatura signature, a rescript, in classical Latin the matrix of a seal, from
signatus, past participle of signare to mark with a stamp, sign (see sign (v.)).    Meaning one's
own name written in one's own hand is from 1570s, replacing sign-manual (early 15c.) in this sense.
Musical sense of signs placed it the beginning of a staff to indicate the key and rhythm is from
1806. Meaning a distinguishing mark of any kind is from 1620s.


trade (v.)

1540s, to tread a path, from trade (n.). Meaning to occupy oneself (in something) is recorded from
c.1600. Meaning to barter is by 1793. The U.S. sports team sense of to exchange one player for
another is attested from 1899. Related: Traded; trading. To trade down is attested from 1942; trade
up from 1959. Trade places exchange situations is from 1917. Trading post is recorded from 1796.
Trading stamp, given by merchants and exchangeable for goods, is from 1897.


causeway (n.)

1570s, from Middle English cauceweye raised road (mid-15c.), first element from Anglo-French cauce,
Old North French cauciee (12c., Modern French chauss&#233;e), from Vulgar Latin *via calciata paved
way, from Latin calcis, genitive of calx (2) limestone, or Late Latin calciare to stamp with the
heels, tread (on notion of a road or mound across marshy ground made firm by treading down), from
Latin calx (1) heel. For second element, see way (n.).


coin (n.)

c.1300, a wedge, from Old French coing (12c.) a wedge; stamp; piece of money; corner, angle, from
Latin cuneus a wedge. The die for stamping metal was wedge-shaped, and the English word came to mean
thing stamped, a piece of money by late 14c. (a sense that already had developed in French). Compare
quoin, which split off from this word 16c. Modern French coin is corner, angle, nook. Coins were
first struck in western Asia Minor in 7c. B.C.E.; Greek tradition and Herodotus credit the Lydians
with being first to make and use coins of silver and gold.


print (v.)

mid-14c., prenten to make an impression (as with a seal, stamp, etc.), from print (n.). Meaning to
set a mark on any surface (including by writing) is attested from late 14c. Meaning to run off on a
press is recorded from 1510s (Caxton, 1474, used enprynte in this sense). In reference to textiles,
1580s. The photography sense is recorded from 1851 (the noun in this sense is from 1853). Meaning to
write in imitation of typography is from 1801.    He always prints, I know, 'cos he learnt writin'
from the large bills in the bookin' offices. [Charles Dickens, Pickwick Papers, 1837]    The meaning
to record (someone's) fingerprints is from 1952. Related: Printed; printing.


traipse (v.)

1590s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French trepasser pass over or beyond, from Old
French trespasser cross, traverse, transgress (see trespass). Or from a source related to Middle
Dutch trappen, dialectal Norwegian trappa to tread, stamp (see trap (n.)). Liberman points out that
it resembles German traben tramp and other similar verbs meaning 'tramp; wander; flee' in several
European languages. They seem to have been part of soldiers' and vagabonds' slang between 1400 and
1700. In all likelihood, they originated as onomatopoeias and spread to neighboring languages from
Low German. Related: Traipsed; traipsing.


trip (v.)

late 14c., tread or step lightly and nimbly, skip, dance, caper, from Old French triper jump around,
dance around, strike with the feet (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch trippen to
skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample, Low German trippeln, Frisian tripje, Dutch trappen, Old English
treppan to tread, trample) related to trap (n.).    The senses of to stumble (intransitive), strike
with the foot and cause to stumble (transitive) are from mid-15c. in English. Meaning to release (a
catch, lever, etc.) is recorded from 1897; trip-wire is attested from 1868. Related: Tripped;
tripping.


mark (v.)

to put a mark on, Old English mearcian (West Saxon), merciga (Anglian) to trace out boundaries, from
Proto-Germanic *markojan (cognates: Old Norse merkja, Old Saxon markon, Old Frisian merkia, Old High
German marchon, German merken to mark, note, Middle Dutch and Dutch merken), from the root of mark
(n.1).    Influenced by Scandinavian cognates. Meaning to have a mark is from c.1400; that of to
notice, observe is late 14c. Meaning to put a numerical price on an object for sale led to verbal
phrase mark down (1859). Mark time (1833) is from military drill. Related: Marked; marking. Old
French merchier to mark, note, stamp, brand is a Germanic loan-word.


print (n.)

c.1300, impression, mark (as by a stamp or seal), from Old French preinte impression, noun use of
fem. past participle of preindre to press, crush, altered from prembre, from Latin premere to press
(see press (v.1)). The Old French word also was borrowed into Middle Dutch (prente, Dutch prent) and
other Germanic languages.    Meaning printed lettering is from 1620s; print-hand print-like
handwriting is from 1658. Sense of picture or design from a block or plate is first attested 1660s.
Meaning piece of printed cloth is from 1756. In Middle English, stigmata were called precious
prentes of crist; to perceiven the print of sight was to feel (someone's) gaze. Out of print no
longer to be had from the publisher is from 1670s (to be in print is recorded from late 15c.). Print
journalism attested from 1962.


rubber (n.)

thing that rubs (a brush, cloth, etc.), 1530s, agent noun from rub (v.). The meaning elastic
substance from tropical plants (short for India rubber) first recorded 1788, introduced to Europe
1744 by Charles Marie de la Condamine, so called because it originally was used as an eraser.Very
useful for erasing the strokes of black lead pencils, and is popularly called rubber, and lead-
eater. [entry for Caoutchouc in Howard, New Royal Encyclopedia, 1788]Meaning overshoe made of rubber
is 1842, American English; slang sense of condom is by 1930s. Sense of deciding match in a game or
contest is 1590s, of unknown signification, and perhaps an entirely separate word. Rubber stamp (n.)
is from 1881; figurative sense of institution whose power is formal but not real is from 1919; the
verb in this sense is from 1934. Rubber cement is attested from 1856 (from 1823 as India-rubber
cement). Rubber check (one that bounces) is from 1927.


slay (v.)

Old English slean to smite, strike, beat, also to kill with a weapon, slaughter (class VI strong
verb; past tense sloh, slog, past participle slagen), from Proto-Germanic *slahan, from root *slog-
to hit (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian sla, Danish slaa, Middle Dutch slaen, Dutch slaan, Old
High German slahan, German schlagen, Gothic slahan to strike). The Germanic words are from PIE root
*slak- to strike (cognates: Middle Irish past participle slactha struck, slacc sword).    Modern
German cognate schlagen maintains the original sense of to strike. Meaning overwhelm with delight
(mid-14c.) preserves one of the wide range of meanings the word once had, including, in Old English,
stamp (coins); forge (weapons); throw, cast; pitch (a tent), to sting (of a snake); to dash, rush,
come quickly; play (the harp); gain by conquest.


punch (v.)

to thrust, push; jostle; also, prod, to drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding, late 14c., from
Old French ponchonner to punch, prick, stamp, from ponchon pointed tool, piercing weapon (see punch
(n.1)). Meaning to pierce, emboss with a tool is from early 15c.; meaning to stab, puncture is from
mid-15c. To punch a ticket, etc., is from mid-15c. To punch the clock record one's arrival at or
departure from the workplace using an automated timing device is from 1900. Related: Punched;
punching.    Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say.  Who lords it o'er the
common herd who chance to come your way;  Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock,
When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK.  [from Punch the Clock, by The
Skipper, The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912]    Specialized sense to hit with the fist
first recorded 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare to fight with the fists, from a root meaning to pierce,
sting. In English this was probably influenced by punish; punch or punsch for punish is found in
documents from 14c.-15c.:    punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery
Plays, late 15c.]    To punch (someone) out beat up is from 1971.


