stammer (n.)

1773, from stammer (v.).


stammer (v.)

Old English stamerian to stammer, from Proto-Germanic *stamro- (cognates: Old Norse stammr
stammering, Old Saxon stamaron, Gothic stamms stammering, Middle Dutch and Dutch stameren, Old High
German stammalon, German stammeln to stammer, a frequentative verb related to adjective forms such
as Old Frisian and German stumm mute). Related: Stammered; stammerer; stammering; stammeringly.


la-la

nonsense refrain in songs, probably from Old English la, a common exclamation; but la-la is
imitative of babbling speech in many languages (compare Greek lalage babble, prattle, Sanskrit
lalalla imitation of stammering Latin lallare to sing to sleep, lull, German lallen to stammer,
Lithuanian laluoti to stammer).


shtoom (adj.)

speechless, silent, from Yiddish, from German stumm silent, mute (see stammer (v.)).


bambino (n.)

little child, 1761, from Italian bambino, baby, a diminutive of bambo simple (compare Latin bambalio
dolt, Greek bambainein to stammer). In U.S. baseball lore, a nickname of George Herman Babe Ruth Jr.
(1895-1948).


tattle (v.)

late 15c., to stammer, prattle, in Caxton's translation of Reynard the Fox, probably from Middle
Flemish tatelen to stutter, parallel to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German, East Frisian tateren to
chatter, babble, possibly of imitative origin. The meaning tell tales or secrets is first recorded
1580s. Sense influenced by tittle. Related: Tattled; tattling. As a noun from 1520s. Tattler, the
name of the famous periodical by Addison and Steele (1709-1711), means idle talker, a gossip.


hesitation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French hesitacion or directly from Latin haesitationem (nominative haesitatio) a
hesitation, stammering, figuratively irresolution, uncertainty, noun of action from past participle
stem of haesitare stick fast, remain fixed; stammer in speech, figuratively hesitate, be irresolute,
be at a loss, be undecided, frequentative of haerere stick, cling, from PIE *ghais-e (source also of
Lithuanian gaistu to delay, tarry), from root *ghais- to adhere; hesitate.


stagger (v.)

mid-15c., walk unsteadily, reel (intransitive), altered from stakeren (early 14c.), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Danish stagra, Old Norse stakra to push, shove, cause to reel, also
to stumble, stagger, perhaps literally hit with a stick, from Proto-Germanic *stakon- a stake, from
PIE *steg- (1) pole, stick. Cognate with Dutch staggelen to stagger, German staggeln to stammer.
Transitive sense of bewilder, amaze first recorded 1550s; that of arrange in a zig-zag pattern is
from 1856. Related: Staggered; staggering.


stumble (v.)

c.1300, to trip or miss one's footing (physically or morally), probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare dialectal Norwegian stumla, Swedish stambla to stumble), probably from a variant of the
Proto-Germanic base *stam-, source of Old English stamerian to stammer, German stumm, Dutch stom
dumb, silent. Possibly influenced in form by stumpen to stumble, but the -b- may be purely
euphonious. Meaning to come (upon) by chance is attested from 1550s. Related: Stumbled; stumbling.
Stumbling-block first recorded 1526 (Tindale), used in Rom. xiv:13, where usually it translates
Greek skandalon.


stutter (v.)

1560s, frequentative form of stutt to stutter, from Middle English stutten to stutter, stammer (late
14c.), cognate with Middle Low German stoten to knock, strike against, collide, from Proto-Germanic
*staut- push, thrust (cognates: Old English stotan, Old High German stozan, Gothic stautan to push,
thrust), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to hit, beat, knock against (see steep (adj.)). The noun is attested
from 1854. Related: Stuttered; stuttering; stutterer.


barbarian (adj.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin barbarinus (source of Old French barbarin Berber, pagan, Saracen,
barbarian), from Latin barbaria foreign country, from Greek barbaros foreign, strange, ignorant,
from PIE root *barbar- echoic of unintelligible speech of foreigners (compare Sanskrit barbara-
stammering, also non-Aryan, Latin balbus stammering, Czech blblati to stammer).    Greek barbaroi
(n.) meant all that are not Greek, but especially the Medes and Persians. Originally not entirely
pejorative, its sense darkened after the Persian wars. The Romans (technically themselves barbaroi)
took up the word and applied it to tribes or nations which had no Greek or Roman accomplishments.
The noun is from late 14c., person speaking a language different from one's own, also (c.1400)
native of the Barbary coast; meaning rude, wild person is from 1610s.


