time zone (n.)

by 1885, from time (n.) + zone (n.). As in Britain and France, the movement to regulate time
nationally came from the railroads.    Previous to 1883 the methods of measuring time in the United
States were so varied and so numerous as to be ludicrous. There were 50 different standards used in
the United States, and on one road between New York and Boston, whose actual difference is 12
minutes, there were three distinct standards of time. Even small towns had two different standards
one known as town or local time and the other railroad time.     ... At noon on November 18, 1883,
there was a general resetting of watches and clocks all over the United States and Canada, and the
four great time zones, one hour apart, into which the country was divided came into being. So
smoothly did the plan work that the general readjustment was accomplished without great difficulty
and it has worked satisfactorily ever since. [Railroad Trainman, 1909]


values (n.)

principles, standards, 1918, from plural of value (n.).


Peoria

small city in Illinois, U.S., originally the name of a subdivision of the Miami/Illinois people
(1673), from native /peewaareewa/. Their own name is said to mean carriers. The place name also is
found in Oklahoma and Iowa, but it is the Illinois city that has been proverbially regarded as the
typical measure of U.S. cultural and intellectual standards at least since Ambrose Bierce (c.1890).
Also the butt of baseball player jokes (c.1920-40, when it was part of the St. Louis Cardinals farm
system) and popularized in the catchphrase It'll play in Peoria (often negative), meaning the
average American will approve, which was popular in the Nixon White House (1969-74) but seems to
have had a vaudeville origin. Personification in little old lady in Peoria is said to be from Harold
Ross of the New Yorker. Peoria's rivals as embodiment of U.S. small city values and standards
include Dubuque, Iowa; Hoboken and Hackensack, N.J.; Oakland (Gertrude Stein: When you get there,
there isn't any there there) and Burbank, Calif., and the entire state of North Dakota.


sleaze (n.)

condition of squalor, by 1967, back-formation from sleazy. Meaning person of low moral standards,
and the adjectival use, are attested from 1976.


obscene (adj.)

1590s, offensive to the senses, or to taste and refinement, from Middle French obsc&#232;ne (16c.),
from Latin obscenus offensive, especially to modesty, originally boding ill, inauspicious, of
unknown origin; perhaps from ob onto (see ob-) + caenum filth. Meaning offensive to modesty or
decency is attested from 1590s. Legally, in U.S., it hinged on whether to the average person,
applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole
appeals to a prurient interest. [Justice William Brennan, Roth v. United States, June 24, 1957];
refined in 1973 by Miller v. California:    The basic guidelines for the trier of fact must be: (a)
whether 'the average person, applying contemporary community standards' would find that the work,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and (c)
whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.    Related: Obscenely.


gentrify (v.)

renovate inner-city housing to middle-class standards, by 1972, from gentry + -fy. Related:
Gentrified, which was used from early 19c. of persons.


perfectionist (n.)

1650s, from perfection + -ist. Originally theological, one who believes moral perfection may be
attained in earthly existence; sense of one satisfied only with the highest standards is from 1934.
Related: Perfectionism.


unnatural (adj.)

early 15c., not in accord with physical nature, from un- (1) not + natural (adj.). Meaning
artificial is attested from 1746; that of at variance with moral standards is from 1520s. Related:
Unnaturally; unnaturalness.


decency (n.)

1560s, appropriateness, from Latin decentia comeliness, decency, from decentem becoming, fitting
(see decent). Meaning modesty (i.e. appropriateness to standards of society) is from 1630s.


normal (adj.)

c.1500, typical, common; 1640s, standing at a right angle, from Late Latin normalis in conformity
with rule, normal, from Latin normalis made according to a carpenter's square, from norma rule,
pattern, literally carpenter's square (see norm). Meaning conforming to common standards, usual is
from 1828, but probably older than the record [Barnhart].    As a noun meaning usual state or
condition, from 1890. Sense of normal person or thing is from 1894. Normal school (1834) is from
French &eacute;cole normale (1794), a republican foundation. The city of Normal, Illinois, U.S., was
named 1857 for the normal school established there.


under (prep., adv.)

Old English under (prep.) beneath, among, before, in the presence of, in subjection to, under the
rule of, by means of, also, as an adverb, beneath, below, underneath, expressing position with
reference to that which is above, from Proto-Germanic *under- (cognates: Old Frisian under, Dutch
onder, Old High German untar, German unter, Old Norse undir, Gothic undar), from PIE *ndher- under
(cognates: Sanskrit adhah below; Avestan athara- lower; Latin infernus lower, infra below).
Productive as a prefix in Old English, as in German and Scandinavian (often forming words modeled on
Latin ones in sub-). Notion of inferior in rank, position, etc. was present in Old English. With
reference to standards, less than in age, price, value, etc., late 14c. As an adjective, lower in
position; lower in rank or degree from 13c. Also used in Old English as a preposition meaning
between, among, as still in under these circumstances, etc. (though this may be an entirely separate
root; see understand).   Under the weather indisposed is from 1810. Under the table is from 1921 in
the sense of very drunk, 1940s in sense of illegal. To get something under (one's) belt is from
1954; to keep something under (one's) hat secret is from 1885; to have something under (one's) nose
in plain sight is from 1540s; to speak under (one's) breath in a low voice is attested from 1832. To
be under (someone's) thumb entirely controlled (by that person) is recorded from 1754.


