stanza (n.)

group of rhymed verse lines, 1580s, from Italian stanza verse of a poem, originally standing,
stopping place, from Vulgar Latin *stantia a stanza of verse, so called from the stop at the end of
it, from Latin stantem (nominative stans), present participle of stare to stand (see stet). Related:
Stanzaic.


ottava rima

1820, Italian, eight-lined stanza, literally eighth rhyme, from ottava eighth (see octave). A stanza
of eight 11-syllable lines, rhymed a b a b a b c c, but in the Byronic variety, they are English
heroic lines of 10 syllables.


sonnet (n.)

1557 (in title of Surrey's poems), from Middle French sonnet (1540s) or directly from Italian
sonetto, literally little song, from Old Proven&ccedil;al sonet song, diminutive of son song, sound,
from Latin sonus sound (see sound (n.1)).    Originally in English also any short lyric poem;
precise meaning is from Italian, where Petrarch (14c.) developed a scheme of an eight-line stanza
(rhymed abba abba) followed by a six-line stanza (cdecde, the Italian sestet, or cdcdcd, the
Sicilian sestet). Shakespeare developed the English Sonnet for his rhyme-poor native tongue: three
Sicilian quatrains followed by a heroic couplet (ababcdcdefefgg). The first stanza sets a situation
or problem, and the second comments on it or resolves it.


stance (n.)

1530s, standing place, station, probably from Middle French stance resting place, harbor (16c.),
from Vulgar Latin *stantia place, abode (also source of Italian stanza stopping place, station,
stanza, Spanish stancia a dwelling), from Latin stans (genitive stantis), present participle of
stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of position of the feet (in golf,
etc.) is first recorded 1897; figurative sense of point of view is recorded from 1956. The sense of
the French word has since narrowed.


sestina (n.)

1797, from Italian, poem of six-lined stanzas, from sesto sixth, from Latin sextus (see six).
Invented by 12c. Proven&ccedil;al troubadour Arnaut Daniel. The line endings of the first stanza are
repeated in different order in the rest, and in an envoi.


quatrain (n.)

1580s, from Middle French quatrain four-line stanza (16c.), from Old French quatre four, from Latin
quattuor four (see four).


Rig veda

1776, from Sanskrit rigveda, from rg- praise, hymn, spoken stanza, literally brightness, from PIE
*erkw- to radiate, beam; praise + veda knowledge, from PIE *weid-o-, from root *weid- to know, see
(see vision (n.)). A thousand hymns, orally transmitted, probably dating from before 1000 B.C.E.
Related: Rig-vedic.


strophe (n.)

c.1600, from Greek strophe stanza, originally a turning, in reference to the section of an ode sung
by the chorus while turning in one direction, from strephein to turn, from PIE *streb(h)- to wind,
turn (cognates: Greek strophaligs whirl, whirlwind, streblos twisted, stremma that which is
twisted).


curtail (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French courtault made short, from court short (Old French cort, from Latin
curtus; see curt) + -ault pejorative suffix of Germanic origin. Originally curtal; used of horses
with docked tails, which probably influenced the spelling in general use; curtal is retained in
poetics to describe a shortened stanza or poem. Related: Curtailed; curtailing.


envoy (n.)

messenger, 1660s, from French envoy&eacute; messenger, literally one sent (12c.), noun use of past
participle of envoyer send, from Vulgar Latin *inviare send on one's way, from Latin in on (see in-
(2)) + via road (see via (adv.)). The same French word was borrowed in Middle English to mean a
stanza of a poem sending it off to find readers (late 14c.).


Anacreontic (adj.)

of or in the manner of Anacreon, convivial bard of Greece (literally Up-lord), the celebrated Greek
lyrical poet (560-478 B.C.E.), born at Teos in Ionia. Also in reference to his lyric form (1706) of
a four-line stanza, rhymed alternately, each line with four beats (three trochees and a long
syllable), also convivial and amatory (1801); and an erotic poem celebrating love and wine (1650s).
Francis Scott Key in 1814 set or wrote his poem The Star-Spangled Banner to the melody of To
Anacreon in Heav'n, the drinking song of the popular London gentleman's club called The Anacreontic
Society, whose membership was dedicated to wit, harmony, and the god of wine. The tune is late 18c.
and may be the work of society member and court musician John Stafford Smith (1750-1836).


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


octave (n.)

c.1300, utaves (plural, via Anglo-French from popular Old French form oitieve, otaves), reformed in
early 15c., from Medieval Latin octava, from Latin octava dies eighth day, fem. of octavus eighth,
from octo (see eight). Originally period of eight days after a festival, also eighth day after a
festival (counting both days, by inclusive reckoning, thus if the festival was on a Sunday, the
octaves would be the following Sunday). Verse sense of stanza of eight lines is from 1580s; musical
sense of note eight diatonic degrees above (or below) a given note is first recorded 1650s, from
Latin octava (pars) eighth part. Formerly English eighth was used in this sense (mid-15c.)


rhyme (n.)

agreement in terminal sounds, 1560s, partially restored spelling, from Middle English ryme, rime
(c.1200) measure, meter, rhythm, later rhymed verse (mid-13c.), from Old French rime (fem.), related
to Old Proven&ccedil;al rim (masc.), earlier *ritme, from Latin rithmus, from Greek rhythmos
measured motion, time, proportion (see rhythm).    In Medieval Latin, rithmus was used for
accentual, as opposed to quantitative, verse, and accentual verse usually was rhymed, hence the
sense shift. Persistence of older form is due to popular association with Old English rim number,
from PIE root *re(i)- to reason, count (see read (v.)). Phrase rhyme or reason good sense (chiefly
used in the negative) is from late 15c. (see reason (n.)). Rhyme scheme is attested from 1931. Rhyme
royal (1841) is a stanza of seven 10-syllable lines rhymed a-b-a-b-b-c-c.


