stanch (v.)

to stop the flow of (especially of blood), early 14c., from Old French estanchier cause to cease
flowing (of blood), stop, hinder; extinguish (of fire); tire, exhaust, drain (Modern French
&#233;tancher), from Vulgar Latin *stancare, perhaps contracted from *stagnicare, from Latin stagnum
pond, pool (see stagnate). But Barnhart says it probably is from Latin stantio, present participle
of stare to stand.


tampon (n.)

plug of cotton to stanch a flow of blood (especially from the vagina), 1848, from French tampon,
from Middle French tampon plug (see tampion). Tampax, proprietary name registered in U.S. 1932, is
based on tampon.


stench (n.)

Old English stenc a smell, odor, scent, fragrance (either pleasant or unpleasant), from Proto-
Germanic *stankwiz (cognates: Old Saxon stanc, Old High German stanch, German stank). Related to
stincan emit a smell (see stink (v.)) as drench is to drink. It tended toward bad smell in Old
English (as a verb, only with this sense), and the notion of evil smell has predominated since
c.1200.


tank (n.)

1610s, pool or lake for irrigation or drinking water, a word originally brought by the Portuguese
from India, from a Hindi source, such as Gujarati tankh cistern, underground reservoir for water,
Marathi tanken, or tanka reservoir of water, tank. Perhaps ultimately from Sanskrit tadaga-m pond,
lake pool, and reinforced in later sense of large artificial container for liquid (1680s) by
Portuguese tanque reservoir, from estancar hold back a current of water, from Vulgar Latin
*stanticare (see stanch). But other sources say the Portuguese word is the source of the Indian
ones. Meaning fuel container is recorded from 1902. Slang meaning detention cell is from 1912.
Railroad tank-car is from 1874.    In military use, armored, gun-mounted vehicle moving on
continuous articulated tracks, the word originated late 1915. In Tanks in the Great War [1920],
Brevet Col. J.F.C. Fuller quotes a memorandum of the Committee of Imperial Defence dated Dec. 24,
1915, recommending the proposed caterpillar machine-gun destroyer machines be entrusted to an
organization which, for secrecy, shall be called the 'Tank Supply Committee,' ... In a footnote,
Fuller writes, This is the first appearance of the word 'tank' in the history of the machine. He
writes that cistern and reservoir also were put forth as possible cover names, all of which were
applicable to the steel-like structure of the machines in the early stages of manufacture. Because
it was less clumsy and monosyllabic, the name 'tank' was decided on. They were first used in action
at Pozieres ridge, on the Western Front, Sept. 15, 1916, and the name was quickly picked up by the
soldiers. Tank-trap attested from 1920.


