star (v.)

1590s, to affix a star or asterisk to, from star (n.). From 1718 as to set with stars. Meaning
perform the lead part (of actors, singers, etc.) is from 1824. Sporting sense is from 1916. Related:
Starred; starring.


star-gazer (n.)

1550s, from star (n.) + agent noun from gaze (v.). Related: Star-gazing (n., 1570s); star-gaze (v.,
1620s).


star-spangled (adj.)

1590s, from star (n.) + spangle (v.); Star-Spangled Banner United States flag is 1814, from Francis
Scott Key's poem (printed in the Baltimore Patriot Sept. 20).


stardust (n.)

also star-dust, 1836 in reference to irresolvable nebulas among star-fields in telescopic views;
1868 as meteoric dust, from star (n.) + dust (n.).


star (n.)

Old English steorra star, from Proto-Germanic *sterron, *sternon (cognates: Old Saxon sterro, Old
Frisian stera, Dutch ster, Old High German sterro, German Stern, Old Norse stjarna, Swedish stjerna,
Danish stierne, Gothic stairno).    This is from PIE *ster- (2) star (cognates: Sanskrit star-,
Hittite shittar, Greek aster, astron, Latin stella, Breton sterenn, Welsh seren star), of uncertain
connection to other roots. Some suggest it is from a root meaning to strew, scatter. Buck and others
doubt the old suggestion that it is a borrowing from Akkadian istar venus. The source of the common
Balto-Slavic word for star (Lithuanian &#382;vaig&#382;de, Old Church Slavonic zvezda, Polish
gwiazda, Russian zvezda) is not explained.    Astrological sense of influence of planets and zodiac
on human affairs is recorded from mid-13c., hence person's fate as figured in the stars (c.1600);
star-crossed ill-fated is from Romeo and Juliet (1592). Meaning lead performer is from 1824; star
turn is from 1898. Stars as a ranking of quality for hotels, restaurants, etc. are attested from
1886, originally in Baedecker guides. Sticker stars as rewards for good students are recorded from
1970s. Brass star as a police badge is recorded from 1859 (New York City). Star-cluster is from
1870. To see stars when one is hit hard on the head is from 1839.


Star Chamber (n.)

late 14c., apartment in the royal palace at Westminster in which members of the king's council sat
to exercise jurisdiction 14-15c., it evolved 15c. into a court of criminal jurisdiction, infamous
under James I and Charles I for arbitrary and oppressive proceedings. Abolished 1641. Supposedly so
called because gilt stars had been painted on the ceiling. Later there was a star on the door.


starlet (n.)

1825, small star, from star (n.) + diminutive suffix -let. Meaning promising young female performer
is from 1911 [Italian soprano Emma Trentini (1878-1959), so called in The Theatre magazine, March
1911].


star-fruit (n.)

Damasonium stellatum, 1857, from star (n.) + fruit (n.). So called for its shape.


starfish (n.)

also star-fish, 1530s, from star (n.) + fish (n.).


starlight (n.)

also star-light, late 14c., from star (n.) + light (n.).


star-lit (adj.)

1813, from star (n.) + lit (adj.).


star-shine (n.)

1580s, from star (n.) + shine (n.).


Star Wars (n.)

name of a popular science fiction film released in 1977; also the informal name for a space-based
missile defense system proposed in 1983 by U.S. president Ronald Reagan.


starship (n.)

space ship, 1934 (in Astounding Stories), from star (n.) + ship (n.). Earlier in reference to
celebrity.


stardom (n.)

1860 in reference to celebrity, from star (n.) + -dom. From 1856 in reference to the celestial sort.


starscape (n.)

1883, from star (n.) + scape (n.1).


starless (adj.)

late 14c., from star (n.) + -less.


starry (adj.)

late 14c., from star (n.) + -y (2). Starry-eyed unrealistically optimistic is attested from 1884;
earlier descriptive of bright eyes. Related: Starrily; starriness.


starling (n.)

Sturnus vulgaris, Old English st&aelig;rlinc starling, with diminutive suffix -linc + st&aelig;r
starling, from Proto-Germanic *staraz (cognates: Old English stearn, Old Norse stari, Norwegian
stare, Old High German stara, German star starling), from PIE *storo- starling (cognates: Latin
sturnus starling, Old Prussian starnite gull).


stellar (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to stars, star-like, from Late Latin stellaris pertaining to a star, starry, from
stella star (see star (n.)). Meaning outstanding, leading (1883) is from the theatrical sense of
star.


astro-

element active in English word formation from mid-18c. and meaning star or celestial body; outer
space, from Greek astro-, stem and comb. form of astron star, related to aster star (see star (n.)).
In ancient Greek, aster typically was a star and astron mostly in plural, the stars. In singular it
mostly meant Sirius (the brightest star).


Sirius (n.)

brightest star by magnitude, late 14c., from Latin Sirius the Dog Star, from Greek Seirios, said to
mean literally scorching or the scorcher. But other related Greek words seem to derive from this
use, and the name might be a folk-etymologized borrowing from some other language. An Egyptian name
for it was Sothis. The connection of the star with scorching heat is from its ancient heliacal
rising at the summer solstice (see dog days). Also see dog star. Related: Sirian. The constellation
Canis Major seems to have grown from the star, not the other way.    Homer made much of it as
[Kyon], but his <b>Dog</b> doubtless was limited to the star Sirius, as among the ancients generally
till, at some unknown date, the constellation was formed as we have it, -- indeed till long
afterwards, for we find many allusions to the Dog in which we are uncertain whether the
constellation or its lucida is referred to. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Canis Major in Star Names and
Their Meanings, London: 1899]


Regulus (n.)

bright star in constellation Leo, 1550s, Modern Latin, apparently first so-called by Copernicus,
literally little king, diminutive of rex king; probably a translation of Basiliskos little king, a
Hellenistic Greek name for the star, mentioned in Geminos and Ptolemy (in the Almagest, though
elsewhere in his writings it is usually the star on the heart of Leo); perhaps a translation of
Lugal king, said to have been the star's Babylonian name. Klein holds it to be a corruption of
Arabic rijl (al-asad) paw of the lion (compare Rigel).


Polaris (n.)

1769, short for stella polaris, Modern Latin, literally the pole star (see polar). The ancient
Greeks called it Phoenice, the Phoenician (star), because the Phoenicians used it for navigation,
though due to precession of the equinoxes it was not then the pole star. Also see pole (n.2). The
Old English word for it was Scip-steorra ship-star, reflecting its importance in navigation. As the
name of a U.S. Navy long-range submarine-launched guided nuclear missile, it dates from 1957.


Fomalhaut

bright star in the constellation Piscis Austrinis, 1594, from Arabic Fum al Hut the Fish's Mouth,
which describes its position in the imaginary star-picture.


lodestar (n.)

late 14c. (late 13c. as a surname), an old name for the pole star (compare Old Norse
lei&eth;arstjarna) as the star that leads the way in navigation; from lode (n.) + star (n.).
Figurative use from late 14c.


stellate (adj.)

c.1500, starry, star-spangled, from Latin stellatus covered with stars, past participle of stellare
to set with stars, from stella (see star (n.)). Meaning star-shaped is recorded from 1660s.


Mogen David

1904, star of David, six-pointed star, symbol of Judaism or Zionism, from Hebrew maghen Dawidh
shield of David, king of Judah and Israel, died c.973 B.C.E.


Esther

fem. proper name, Old Testament wife of the Persian king Ahasuerus, from Greek Esther, from Hebrew
Ester, from Persian sitareh star, related to Avestan star- (see star (n.)).


Estella

fem. proper name, Spanish, literally star, from Latin stella (see star (n.)).


all-star (adj.)

1893, originally of theatrical casts, from all + star (n.) in the celebrated person sense. From 1898
in reference to sports teams.


brite

variant of bright (adj.). It figures in English phonetic spelling reform from at least the late
19c.; as an advertiser's word it dates from at least 1905 (Star-brite Metal Polish, made by the
Star-Brite Company of Lancaster, Pa., U.S.).


aster (n.)

flower genus, 1706, from Latin aster star (see star (n.)); so called for the radiate heads of the
flowers. Originally used in English in the Latin sense (c.1600) but this is obsolete.


Cepheid (n.)

type of variable star, 1904, from Delta Cephi, the name of the first such star identified, which is
in the dim northern constellation Cephus, named for Greek Kepheus, a mythical king. With -id.


dog days (n.)

1530s, from Latin dies caniculares, from Greek; so called because they occur around the time of the
heliacal rising of Sirius, the Dog Star (kyon seirios). Noted as the hottest and most unwholesome
time of the year; usually July 3 to Aug. 11, but variously calculated, depending on latitude and on
whether the greater Dog-star (Sirius) or the lesser one (Procyon) is reckoned.    The heliacal
rising of Sirius has shifted down the calendar with the precession of the equinoxes; in ancient
Egypt c.3000 B.C.E. it coincided with the summer solstice, which also was the new year and the
beginning of the inundation of the Nile. The dog association apparently began here (the star's
hieroglyph was a dog), but the reasons for it are obscure.


Bellatrix

bright star in the left shoulder of Orion, from Latin bellatrix a female warrior, frequently used as
an adjective, warlike, skilled in war, fem. of bellator to wage war, from bellum war (see
bellicose). The Latin name, from the Alfonsine Tables (mid-13c.), very loosely translates the Arabic
name for the star, Al Najid the conqueror.    In astrology it was the natal star of all destined to
great civil or military honors, and rendered women born under its influence lucky and loquacious; or
as old Thomas Hood said, Women born under this constellation shall have mighty tongues. [Allen]


phosphor (n.)

morning star, 1630s, from Latin phosphorus the morning star (see phosphorus). Meaning anything
phosphorescent is from 1705.


pole-star (n.)

the North Star (see Polaris), 1550s, from pole (n.2) + star (n.).


Stella

fem. proper name, from Latin stella star (see star (n.)).


North Star (n.)

Pole Star, Polaris, Middle English nor&thorn;e sterre (late 14c.); cognates: Middle Dutch
noirdstern, German nordstern.


co-star

also costar, 1919 as a verb; 1926 as a noun, from co- + star (v.).


asteroid (n.)

1802, coined probably by German-born English astronomer William Herschel (1738-1822) from Greek
asteroeides star-like, from aster star (see astro-) + -eidos form, shape (see -oid).


asterisk (n.)

figure used in printing and writing to indicate footnote, omission, etc., late 14c., asterich,
asterisc, from Late Latin asteriscus, from Greek asterikos little star, diminutive of aster star
(see astro-). As a verb from 1733.


nova (n.)

1877, from Latin nova, fem. singular adjective of novus new (see new), used with stella star (a
feminine noun in Latin) to describe a new star not previously known. Classical plural is novae.


astrolabe (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French astrelabe, from Medieval Latin astrolabium, from Greek astrolabos
(organon) star taking (instrument), from astron star (see astro-) + lambanien to take (see
analemma).


Canopus (n.)

bright southern star, 1550s, ultimately from Greek Kanopos, Kanobos perhaps from Egyptian Kahi Nub
golden earth. The association with weight found in the name of the star in some northern tongues may
reflect the fact that it never rises far above the horizon in those latitudes. Also the name of a
town in ancient lower Egypt (famous for its temple of Serapis), hence canopic jar, canopic vase,
which often held the entrails of embalmed bodies (1878).


astroid (adj.)

star-shaped, 1897, from Greek astroeides, from astron star (see astro-) + -oeides (see -oid).


Procyon (n.)

bright star in constellation Canis Minoris, 1650s, from Latin, from Greek prokyon, from pro before
(see pro-) + kyon dog (see canine (n.)); so called from its rising just before the Dog Star, Sirius.
By Roman astronomers, sometimes Latinized as Antecanis.


disaster (n.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;sastre (1560s), from Italian disastro ill-starred, from dis-,
here merely pejorative (see dis-) + astro star, planet, from Latin astrum, from Greek astron (see
star (n.)). The sense is astrological, of a calamity blamed on an unfavorable position of a planet.


Berenice

fem. proper name, from Latin Berenice, from Macedonian Greek Berenike (classical Greek Pherenike),
literally bringer of victory, from pherein to bring (see infer) + nike victory. The constellation
Berenice's hair is from the story of the pilfered locks of the wife of Ptolemy Euergetes, king of
Egypt, c.248 B.C.E., which the queen cut off as an offering to Venus. The constellation features a
dim but visible star cluster. But the earliest use of the phrase in astronomy in English was as a
name for the star Canopus (1601).


