stark (adj.)

Old English stearc stiff, strong, rigid, obstinate; stern, severe, hard; harsh, rough, violent, from
Proto-Germanic *starkaz (cognates: Old Norse sterkr, Danish, Old Frisian sterk, Middle Dutch starc,
Old High German starah, German stark, Gothic *starks), from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). From the same root as stare (v.).    Meaning utter, sheer, complete first recorded c.
1400, perhaps from influence of common phrase stark dead (late 14c.), with stark mistaken as an
intensive adjective. Sense of bare, barren is from 1833. As an adverb from c. 1200. Related:
Starkly; starkness. Stark-raving (adj.) is from 1640s; earlier stark-staring 1530s.


stark-naked (adj.)

1520s, deformed (by influence of stark (adj.)) from Middle English start naked (early 13c.), from
Old English steort tail, rump, from Proto-Germanic *stertaz (cognates: Old Norse stertr, Danish
stjert, Middle Dutch stert, Dutch staart, Old High German sterz, German Sterz), from PIE *sterd-,
extended form of root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (see stereo-). Hence British slang
starkers naked (1923).


redwood (n.)

1610s, wood that has a red hue, from red (adj.1) + wood (n.). Of various types of New World trees
that yield such wood, from 1716; specifically of the California Sequoia sempervirens from 1819. In
Scottish English 16c.-18c. the same word as an adjective meant completely deranged, raving, stark
mad, from wood (adj.).


starch (v.)

late 14c., from Old English *stercan (Mercian), *stiercan (West Saxon) make rigid, found in
stercedferh&eth; fixed, hard, resolute (related to stearc stiff), from Proto-Germanic *starkijan to
make hard (cognates: German St&auml;rke strength, starch, Swedish st&#228;rka to starch), from PIE
root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stark). Related: Starched; starching.


thorn (n.)

Old English &thorn;orn sharp point on a stem or branch, earlier thorny tree or plant, from Proto-
Germanic *thurnuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian  thorn, Dutch doorn, Old High German dorn,
German Dorn, Old Norse &thorn;orn, Gothic &thorn;aurnus), from PIE *trnus (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic trunu thorn, Sanskrit trnam blade of grass, Greek ternax stalk of the cactus, Irish trainin
blade of grass), from *(s)ter-n- thorny plant, from root *ster- (1) stiff (see stark).    Figurative
sense of anything which causes pain is recorded from early 13c. (thorn in the flesh is from II Cor.
xii:7). Also an Anglo-Saxon and Icelandic runic letter (&thorn;), named for the word of which it was
the initial (see -th-).


strong (adj.)

Old English strang physically powerful, powerful in effect; forceful, severe, firm, bold, brave;
constant, resolute; arduous, violent, from Proto-Germanic *strangaz (cognates: Old Norse strangr
strong, Dutch streng strict, rigorous, Old High German strang strong, bold, hard, German streng
strict, rigorous), possibly from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow. Originally compared strenger, strengest
(compare old/elder/eldest).    Grammatical sense, of noun and verb inflections, is first attested
1841, translating German stark, used in a grammatical sense by J. Grimm (the terms strong and weak
better fit German inflections). Strong suit (1865) is from card-playing. Strong man man of great
strength (especially one who displays it professionally) is recorded from 1690s; meaning dominating
man in a political organization is from 1859.


stork (n.)

Old English storc stork, from Proto-Germanic *sturkaz (cognates: Old Norse storkr, Swedish and
Danish stork, Middle Dutch storc, Old High German storah, German Storch stork), from PIE *ster-
stiff (cognates: Old English stear stiff, strong; see stark). Perhaps so called with reference to
the bird's stiff or rigid posture. But some connect the word to Greek torgos vulture.    Old Church
Slavonic struku, Russian sterkhu, Lithuanian starkus, Hungarian eszterag, Albanian sterkjok stork
are said to be Germanic loan-words. The children's fable that babies are brought by storks (told by
adults who aren't ready to go into the details) is in English by 1854, from German and Dutch nursery
stories, no doubt from the notion that storks nesting on one's roof meant good luck, often in the
form of family happiness.


stretch (v.)

Old English streccan (transitive and intransitive) to stretch, spread out, prostrate; reach, extend
(past tense strehte, past participle streht), from Proto-Germanic *strakjanan (cognates: Danish
str&aelig;kke, Swedish str&auml;cka, Old Frisian strekka, Old High German strecchan, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch, Old High German, German strecken to stretch, draw out), perhaps a variant of
the root of stark, or else from PIE root *strenk- tight, narrow; pull tight, twist (see string
(n.)).    Meaning to extend (the limbs or wings) is from c. 1200; that of to lay out for burial is
from early 13c. To stretch one's legs take a walk is from c. 1600. Meaning to lengthen by force
first recorded late 14c.; figurative sense of to enlarge beyond proper limits, exaggerate, is from
1550s. Stretch limo first attested 1973. Stretch marks is attested from 1960. Related: Stretched;
stretching.


tail (n.1)

hindmost part of an animal, Old English t&aelig;gl, t&aelig;gel a tail, from Proto-Germanic *tagla-
(cognates: Old High German zagal, German Zagel tail, dialectal German Zagel penis, Old Norse tagl
horse's tail, Gothic tagl hair), from PIE *doklos, from suffixed form of root *dek- (2) something
long and thin (referring to such things as fringe, lock of hair, horsetail; cognates: Old Irish dual
lock of hair, Sanskrit dasah fringe, wick). According to OED, the primary sense, at least in
Germanic, seems to have been hairy tail, or just tuft of hair, but already in Old English the word
was applied to the hairless tails of worms, bees, etc. But Buck writes that the common notion is of
long, slender shape. As an adjective from 1670s.    Meaning reverse side of a coin (opposite the
side with the head) is from 1680s; that of backside of a person, buttocks is recorded from c. 1300;
slang sense of pudenda is from mid-14c.; that of woman as sex object is from 1933, earlier act of
copulation with a prostitute (1846). Of descending strokes of letters, from 1590s.   Tails coat with
tails is from 1857. The tail-race (1776) is the part of a mill race below the wheel. To turn tail
take flight (1580s) originally was a term in falconry. The image of the tail wagging the dog is
attested from 1907. Another Old English word for tail was steort (see stark).


