stately (adj.)

noble, splendid, late 14c., from -ly (1) + state (n.1) in a sense of costly and imposing display
(such as benefits a person of rank and wealth), attested from early 14c. This sense also is
preserved in the phrase to lie in state to be ceremoniously exposed to view before interment (1705).
Hence also stateroom. Related: Stateliness.


stout (adj.)

c.1300, proud, valiant, strong, from Old French estout brave, fierce, proud, earlier estolt strong,
from a Germanic source from West Germanic *stult- proud, stately, strutting (cognates: Middle Low
German stolt stately, proud, German stolz proud, haughty, arrogant, stately), from PIE root *stel-
to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Meaning strong in body, powerfully built is attested from late
14c., but has been displaced by the (often euphemistic) meaning thick-bodied, fat and large, bulky
in figure, which is first recorded 1804. Original sense preserved in figurative phrase stout-hearted
(1550s). Related: Stoutly; stoutness.


Junoesque (adj.)

in reference to stately, mature beauty, 1861, from Juno + -esque. Qualities associated with the
Roman goddess, who also was notable for her fits of rage.


portly (adj.)

early 15c., stately, dignified, from port (n.3) bearing, carriage + -ly (1). Meaning stout is first
recorded 1590s.


statuesque (adj.)

of or like a statue in some sense, especially stately, having a formal dignity and beauty, tall and
solidly built, 1823, from statue, patterned on picturesque. Related: Statuesquely; statuesqueness.


pomposity (n.)

early 15c., pomp, solemnity, from Medieval Latin pompositas, from Late Latin pomposus stately,
pompous (see pompous). The sense of ostentatious display is from 1610s; earlier in French
pomposit&eacute;.


burly (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old English burlic noble, stately, literally bowerly, fit to frequent a lady's
apartment (see bower). Sense descended through stout, and sturdy by 15c. to heavily built. Another
theory connects the Old English word to Old High German burlih lofty, exalted, related to burjan to
raise, lift.


stateroom (n.)

also state-room, 1703, room reserved for ceremonial occasions; earlier (1650s) a captain's cabin;
from room (n.) + state (n.1) in a sense also preserved in stately.


pavan (n.)

slow, stately dance, 1530s, from French pavane (1520s), probably from Spanish pavana, from pavo
peacock (from Latin pavo), in reference to the bird's courting movements. But some see an Italian
origin and trace the name to Padovana Paduan. Possibly there was a merger of two distinct dance
words.


agave (n.)

American aloe plant, 1797, from Latin Agave, from Greek Agaue, proper name in mythology (mother of
Pentheus), from agauos noble, perhaps from agasthai wonder at, from gaiein to rejoice, exult, with
intensive prefix a-. The name seems to have been taken generically by botanists, the plant perhaps
so called for its stately flower stem.


mausoleum (n.)

magnificent tomb, 1540s, from Latin mausoleum, from Greek Mausoleion, name of the massive marble
tomb built 353 B.C.E. at Halicarnassus (Greek city in Asia Minor) for Mausolos, Persian satrap who
made himself king of Caria. It was built by his wife (and sister), Artemisia. Counted among the
Seven Wonders of the ancient world, it was destroyed by an earthquake in the Middle Ages. General
sense of any stately burial-place is from c.1600.


pavilion (n.)

c.1200, large, stately tent, from Old French paveillon large tent; butterfly (12c.), from Latin
papilionem (nominative papilio) butterfly, moth, in Medieval Latin tent (see papillon); the type of
tent so called on resemblance to wings. Meaning open building in a park, etc., used for shelter or
entertainment is attested from 1680s.


prance (v.)

late 14c., originally of horses, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English pranken to
show off, from Middle Dutch pronken to strut, parade (see prank); or perhaps from Danish dialectal
prandse to go in a stately manner. Klein suggests Old French paravancier. Related: Pranced;
prancing. As a noun from 1751, from the verb.


polonaise (n.)

1773, woman's overdress (from fancied resemblance to Polish costume); 1797, stately dance, from
French (danse) polonaise a Polish (dance), fem. of polonais (adj.) Polish, from Pologne Poland, from
Medieval Latin Polonia Poland (see Poland). In the culinary sense, applied to dishes supposed to be
cooked in Polish style, attested from 1889.


wl-

an initial sound cluster in words in Old English and early Middle English; among the Old English
words were wlanc stately, splendid; wl&#230;tung nausea; wlenc pride, arrogance (Middle English
wlonk); wlite brightness, beauty, splendor; wlitig radiant, physically beautiful (Middle English
wliti).


pompous (adj.)

late 14c., characterized by exaggerated self-importance, from Old French pompos (14c., Modern French
pompeux) and directly from Late Latin pomposus stately, pompous, from Latin pompa pomp (see pomp).
More literal (but less common) meaning characterized by pomp is attested from early 15c. Related:
Pompously.


tragic (adj.)

1540s, calamitous, disastrous, fatal (resembling the actions in a stage tragedy), shortened from
tragical (late 15c.), modeled on Latin tragicus, from Greek tragikos of or pertaining to tragedy;
stately, majestic; plaintive, literally goatish, of or pertaining to a goat, and perhaps referring
to a satyr impersonated by a goat singer or satyric actor, from tragodia (see tragedy). Tragic flaw
(1913) translates Greek hamartia. Related: Tragically.


sublime (adj.)

1580s, expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner, from Middle French sublime (15c.), or directly
from Latin sublimis uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished, possibly
originally sloping up to the lintel, from sub up to + limen lintel, threshold, sill (see limit
(n.)). The sublime (n.) the sublime part of anything, that which is stately or imposing is from
1670s. For Sublime Porte, former title of the Ottoman government, see Porte.


swoop (v.)

1560s, to move or walk in a stately manner, apparently from a dialectal survival of Old English
swapan to sweep, brandish, dash, from Proto-Germanic *swaip-, from PIE root *swei- (2) to bend, turn
(see swivel (n.)). Meaning pounce upon with a sweeping movement first recorded 1630s (see swoop
(n.)). Spelling with -oo- may have been influenced by Scottish and northern England dialectal soop
to sweep, from Old Norse sopa to sweep. Related: Swooped; swooping.


mansion (n.)

mid-14c., chief residence of a lord, from Old French mansion stay, permanent abode, house,
habitation, home; mansion; state, situation (13c.), from Latin mansionem (nominative mansio) a
staying, a remaining, night quarters, station, noun of action from past participle stem of manere to
stay, abide, from PIE *men- to remain, wait for (cognates: Greek menein to remain, Persian mandan to
remain). Sense of any large and stately house is from 1510s. The word also was used in Middle
English as a stop or stage of a journey, hence probably astrological sense temporary home (late
14c.).


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


proud (adj.)

late Old English  prud, prute excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, probably from Old French prud,
oblique case of adjective prouz brave, valiant (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme brave
man), from Late Latin prode advantageous, profitable (source also of Italian prode valiant), a back-
formation from Latin prodesse be useful, from pro- before, for, instead of (see pro-) + esse to be
(see essence). Also see pride (n.), prowess.    Meaning elated by some act, fact, or thing is from
mid-13c. To do (someone) proud attested by 1819. Related: Proudness. The -d- in prodesse is probably
due to the influence of forms like red-eo-, 'I go back,' red-imo- 'I buy back,' etc. [OED]. The Old
English form with -te probably is from or influenced by pride.    The sense of have a high opinion
of oneself, not found in Old French, might reflect the Anglo-Saxons' opinion of the Norman knights
who called themselves proud. Old Norse pru&eth;r, probably from the same French source, had only the
sense brave, gallant, magnificent, stately (compare Icelandic pru&eth;ur, Middle Swedish prudh,
Middle Danish prud). Likewise a group of pride words in the Romance languages -- such as French
orgueil, Italian orgoglio, Spanish orgullo -- are borrowings from Germanic, where they had positive
senses (Old High German urgol distinguished).    Most Indo-European languages use the same word for
proud in its good and bad senses, but in many the bad sense seems to be the earlier one. The usual
way to form the word is by some compound of terms for over or high and words for heart, mood,
thought, or appearance; such as Greek hyperephanos, literally over-appearing; Gothic
hauh&thorn;uhts, literally high-conscience. Old English had ofermodig over-moody (mood in Anglo-
Saxon was a much more potent word than presently) and heahheort high-heart. Words for proud in other
Indo-European languages sometimes reflect a physical sense of being swollen or puffed up; such as
Welsh balch, probably from a root meaning to swell, and Modern Greek kamari, from ancient Greek
kamarou furnish with a vault or arched cover, with a sense evolution via make an arch, to puff out
the chest, to be puffed up (compare English slang chesty).


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


