stature (n.)

early 14c., natural height of a body, height, from Old French stature, estature build, structure,
from Latin statura height, size of body, size, growth, from PIE *ste-tu-, from root *sta- to stand,
with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Figurative sense first recorded
1834.


Curacao

West Indian island, Cura&ccedil;ao, discovered 1499 by Alonso de Hojeda, who called it Isla de los
Gigantes in reference to the stature of the natives. The modern name probably is a Europeanized
version of some lost native word. The liqueur is made from the dried peel of the Cura&ccedil;ao
orange.


personage (n.)

mid-15c., body of a person (with regard to appearance), from Old French personage size, stature,
also a dignitary (13c.), from Medieval Latin personaticum (11c.), from persona (see person). Meaning
a person of high rank or distinction is attested from c. 1500 in English; as a longer way to say
person, the word was in use from 1550s (but often slyly ironical, with suggestion that the subject
is overly self-important).


American dream

coined 1931 by James Truslow Adams (1878-1949), U.S. writer and popular historian (unrelated to the
Massachusetts Adamses), in Epic of America.    [The American Dream is] that dream of a land in which
life should be better and richer and fuller for everyone, with opportunity for each according to
ability or achievement. It is a difficult dream for the European upper classes to interpret
adequately, and too many of us ourselves have grown weary and mistrustful of it. It is not a dream
of motor cars and high wages merely, but a dream of social order in which each man and each woman
shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are innately capable, and be recognized
by others for what they are, regardless of the fortuitous circumstances of birth or position.
[Adams]    Others have used the term as they will.


virago (n.)

late 14c., man-like or heroic woman, woman of extraordinary stature, strength and courage, from
Latin virago female warrior, heroine, amazon, from vir man (see virile). &AElig;lfric (c. 1000),
following Vulgate, used it in Gen. ii:23 as the name Adam gave to Eve (KJV = woman):   Beo hire nama
Uirago, &thorn;&aelig;t is, f&aelig;mne, for&eth;an &eth;e heo is of hire were genumen.   Related:
Viraginous.


base (adj.)

late 14c., low, of little height, from Old French bas low, lowly, mean, from Late Latin bassus
thick, stumpy, low (used only as a cognomen in classical Latin, humilis being there the usual word
for low in stature or position), possibly from Oscan, or Celtic, or related to Greek basson,
comparative of bathys deep. Figurative sense of low in the moral scale is first attested 1530s in
English, earlier servile (1520s). Base metals (c. 1600) were worthless in contrast to noble or
precious metals.


waist (n.)

late 14c., middle part of the body, also part of a garment fitted for the waist, portion of a
garment that covers the waist (but, due to fashion styles, often above or below it), probably from
Old English *w&aelig;st growth, hence, where the body grows, from Proto-Germanic *wahs-tu-
(cognates: Old English w&aelig;stm, Old Norse v&#246;xtr, Swedish v&auml;xt, Old High German wahst
growth, increase, Gothic wahstus stature, Old English weaxan to grow see wax (v.)), from PIE *wegs-,
extended form of root *aug- (1) to increase (see augment).


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c. 1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


state (n.1)

c. 1200, circumstances, position in society, temporary attributes of a person or thing, conditions,
from Old French estat position, condition; status, stature, station, and directly from Latin status
a station, position, place; way of standing, posture; order, arrangement, condition, figuratively
standing, rank; public order, community organization, noun of action from past participle stem of
stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Some Middle English senses are via Old
French estat (French &eacute;tat; see estate).    The Latin word was adopted into other modern
Germanic languages (German, Dutch staat) but chiefly in the political senses only. Meaning physical
condition as regards form or structure is attested from late 13c. Meaning mental or emotional
condition is attested from 1530s (phrase state of mind first attested 1749); colloquial sense of
agitated or perturbed state is from 1837.     He [the President] shall from time to time give to the
Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures
as he shall judge necessary and expedient. [U.S. Constitution, Article II, Section iii]


