statute (n.)

late 13c., from Old French statut, estatut (royal) promulgation, (legal) statute, from Late Latin
statutum a law, decree, noun use of neuter past participle of Latin statuere enact, establish, from
status condition, position (see status).


statutory (adj.)

pertaining to statues, depending on statute for authority, required by statute, 1717, from statute +
-ory. Statutory rape attested from 1873; in U.S., sexual intercourse with a female below the legal
age of consent, whether forced or not. Related: Statutorily.


fray (n.)

mid-14c., feeling of alarm, shortening of affray (q.v.; see also afraid). Meaning a brawl, a fight
is from early 15c. (but late 14c. in Anglo-Latin). Fraymaker fighter, brawler is an excellent word
from a 1530s statute.


common law (n.)

mid-14c., the customary and unwritten laws of England as embodied in commentaries and old cases (see
common (adj.)), as opposed to statute law. Phrase common law marriage is attested from 1909.


hogshead (n.)

large cask or barrel, late 14c., presumably on some perceived resemblance. The original liquid
measure was 63 old wine gallons (by a statute of 1423); later anywhere from 100 to 140 gallons.
Borrowed into other Germanic languages, oddly, as ox-head (Dutch okshoofd, German oxhoft, Swedish
oxhufvud).


limitation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French limitacion and directly from Latin limitationem (nominative limitatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of limitare (see limit (v.)). Phrase statute of limitations
attested by 1768.


Everglades (n.)

1823, from everglade, from ever, perhaps in sense of endless + glade.    The distance from the mouth
of Hilsborough river to the head of the lake, in a direct line, is about 110 statute miles. The
country between them is mostly, if not wholly, an everglade, by which is meant a low marsh
frequently covered with water, and in which there grows a sharp triangular grass, from ten to twelve
feet high, and impervious to men or animals. [American Mechanics' Magazine, 1825]


correction (n.)

mid-14c., action of correcting, from Old French correccion (13c.) correction, amendment; punishment,
rebuke, from Latin correctionem (nominative correctio), noun of action from past participle stem of
corrigere (see correct (v.)). Meaning chastisement is from late 14c. Meaning an instance of
correction is from 1520s. House of correction was in a royal statute from 1575.


theocracy (n.)

1737; earlier as un-Latinized theocraty (1620s), form of government in which God is recognized as
supreme ruler and his laws form the statute book, originally of the sacerdotal government of Israel
before the rise of kings, from later Greek theokratia (Josephus), literally  the rule of God, from
theos god (see theo-) + kratos a rule, regime, strength (see -cracy). Meaning priestly or religious
body wielding political and civil power is recorded from 1825.  Related: Theocratic (1741).


-dom

abstract suffix of state, from Old English dom statute, judgment (see doom (n.)). Already active as
a suffix in Old English (as in freodom, wisdom); from stem *do- do + *-moz abstract suffix. Cognate
with German -tum, Old High German tuom.


article (n.)

c.1200, separate parts of anything written (such as the statements in the Apostles' Creed, the
clauses of a statute or contract), from Old French article (13c.), from Latin articulus, diminutive
of artus a joint (from PIE *ar-tu-, from *ar- to fit together; (see arm (n.1)).    Meaning extended
to a small division, then generalized to item, thing. Older sense preserved in Articles of War
military regulations (1716) and Articles of Confederation (U.S. history). Meaning literary
composition in a journal, etc. (independent, but part of a larger work) first recorded 1712. Meaning
piece of property (clothing, etc.) first attested 1796, originally in rogue's cant.


law (n.)

Old English lagu (plural laga, comb. form lah-) law, ordinance, rule, regulation; district governed
by the same laws, from Old Norse *lagu law, collective plural of lag layer, measure, stroke,
literally something laid down or fixed, from Proto-Germanic *lagan put, lay (see lay (v.)).
Replaced Old English &aelig; and gesetnes, which had the same sense development as law. Compare also
statute, from Latin statuere; German Gesetz law, from Old High German gisatzida; Lithuanian
istatymas, from istatyti set up, establish. In physics, from 1660s. Law and order have been coupled
since 1796.


purview (n.)

mid-15c., body of a statute, from Anglo-French purveuest it is provided, or purveu que provided that
(late 13c.), clauses that introduced statutes in old legal documents, from Anglo-French purveu, Old
French porveu (Modern French pourvu) provided, past participle of porveoir to provide, from Latin
providere make ready (see provide). Sense of scope, extent is first recorded 1788 in Federalist
(Madison). Modern sense and spelling influenced by view (n.).


throne (n.)

c.1200, trone, the seat of God or a saint in heaven; c.1300 as seat occupied by a sovereign, from
Old French trone (12c., Modern French tr&#244;ne), from Latin thronus, from Greek thronos elevated
seat, chair, throne, from PIE root *dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (cognates: Latin firmus firm,
steadfast, strong, stable, Sanskrit dharma statute, law; see firm (adj.)). From late 14c. as a
symbol of royal power. Colloquial meaning toilet is recorded from 1922. The classical -h- begins to
appear in English from late 14c.


golf (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish gouf, usually taken as an alteration of Middle Dutch colf, colve stick, club,
bat, from Proto-Germanic *kulth- (cognates: Old Norse kolfr clapper of a bell, German Kolben mace,
club). The game is from 14c., the word is first mentioned (along with fut-bol) in a 1457 Scottish
statute on forbidden games. Golf ball attested from 1540s. <b>Despite what you read on the Internet,
golf is not an acronym</b>. Golf widow is from 1890.    Oh! who a golfer's bride would be,  Fast
mated with a laddie  Who every day goes out to tee And with him takes the caddie.  [The Golf Widow's
Lament, in Golf, Oct. 31, 1890]


football (n.)

open-air game, first recorded c.1400; see foot (n.) + ball (n.1). Forbidden in a Scottish statute of
1424. The first reference to the ball itself is late 15c. Figurative sense of something idly kicked
around is first recorded 1530s. Ball-kicking games date back to the Roman legions, at least, but the
sport seems to have risen to a national obsession in England, c.1630. Rules first regularized at
Cambridge, 1848; soccer (q.v.) split off in 1863.    The U.S. style (known to some in England as
stop-start rugby with padding) evolved gradually 19c.; the first true collegiate game is considered
to have been played Nov. 6, 1869, between Princeton and Rutgers, at Rutgers, but the rules there
were more like soccer. A rematch at Princeton Nov. 13, with the home team's rules, was true U.S.
football. The earliest recorded application of the word football to this is from 1881.


section (n.)

late 14c., intersection of two straight lines; division of a scale; from Old French section or
directly from Latin sectionem (nominative sectio) a cutting, cutting off, division, noun of action
from past participle stem of secare to cut, from PIE root *sek- to cut (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic seko, se&#353;ti to cut, se &#269;ivo ax, hatchet; Lithuanian isekti to engrave, carve;
Albanian &#353;ate mattock; Old Saxon segasna, Old English sig&eth;e scythe; Old English secg sword,
seax knife, short sword; Old Irish doescim I cut; Latin saxum rock, stone).    From 1550s as act of
cutting or dividing. Meaning subdivision of a written work, statute, etc. is from 1570s. Meaning a
part cut off from the rest is from early 15c.


acre (n.)

Old English &aelig;cer tilled field, open land, from Proto-Germanic *akraz field, pasture (cognates:
Old Norse akr, Old Saxon akkar, Old Frisian ekker, Middle Dutch acker, Dutch akker, Old High German
achar, German acker, Gothic akrs), from PIE *agro- field (cognates: Latin ager field, land, Greek
agros, Sanskrit ajras plain, open country).    Originally in English without reference to dimension;
in late Old English the amount of land a yoke of oxen could plow in a day, afterward defined by
statute as a piece 40 poles by 4, or an equivalent shape (5 Edw. I, 31 Edw. III, 24 Hen. VIII).
Original sense retained in God's acre churchyard.


mile (n.)

Old English mil, from West Germanic *milja (cognates: Middle Dutch mile, Dutch mijl, Old High German
mila, German meile), from Latin milia thousands, plural of mille a thousand (neuter plural was
mistaken in Germanic as a fem. singular), of unknown origin.    The Latin word also is the source of
French mille, Italian miglio, Spanish milla. The Scandinavian words (Old Norse mila, etc.) are from
English. An ancient Roman mile was 1,000 double paces (one step with each foot), for about 4,860
feet, but there were many local variants and a modern statute mile is about 400 feet longer. In
Germany, Holland, and Scandinavia in the Middle Ages, the Latin word was applied arbitrarily to the
ancient Germanic rasta, a measure of from 3.25 to 6 English miles. Mile-a-minute (adj.) very fast is
attested from 1957.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


