steadfast (adj.)

Old English stedef&aelig;st secure in position, steady, firm in its place, from stede  (see stead) +
f&aelig;st (see fast (adj.)); similar formation in Middle Low German stedevast, Old Norse
sta&eth;fastr steadfast, firm; faithful, staunch, firm in one's mind. Of persons, in English,
unshakable, stubborn, resolute from c.1200. Related: Steadfastly, steadfastness.


stable (adj.)

mid-12c., trustworthy, reliable; mid-13c., constant, steadfast; virtuous; from Old French stable,
estable constant, steadfast, unchanging, from Latin stabilis firm, steadfast, stable, fixed,
figuratively durable, unwavering, literally able to stand, from PIE *ste-dhli-, from root *sta- to
stand (see stet). From c.1300 as well-founded, well-established, secure (of governments, etc.).
Physical sense of secure against falling is recorded from late 14c.; also of even temperament. Of
nuclear isotopes, from 1904.


constant (adj.)

late 14c., steadfast, resolute, from Old French constant (14c.) or directly from Latin constantem
(nominative constans) standing firm, stable, steadfast, faithful, present participle of constare,
from com- together (see com-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Of actions
and conditions from 1650s. Related: Constantly.


firm (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ferm (12c.) firm, strong, vigorous, steadfast; loyal, faithful, from
Latin firmus firm, strong, steadfast, enduring, stable, from PIE root *dher- (1) to hold, support
(cognates: Sanskrit dharmah custom, law, Greek thronos seat, Lithuanian dirzmas strong, Welsh dir
hard, Breton dir steel). The return in late 1500s to -i- from Middle English ferme was modeled on
Latin. Related: Firmly; firmness.


fastly (adv.)

former adverbial cousin to fast (adj.), from Old English f&aelig;stlic firm, fixed, steadfast,
resolute; obsolete in 19c., simple fast taking its place.


astatic (adj.)

1827, from Greek astatos unstable, not steadfast, from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + statos
placed, standing, from PIE root *sta- (see stet).


aspiration (n.1)

1530s, action of breathing into, from Latin aspirationem (nominative aspiratio) a breathing on, a
blowing upon; rough breathing; influence, noun of action from past participle stem of aspirare (see
aspire). Meaning steadfast longing for a higher goal, earnest desire for something above one is
recorded from c.1600 (sometimes collectively, as aspirations).


tenacity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French t&eacute;nacit&eacute; (14c.) and directly from Latin tenacitas an
act of holding fast, from tenax (genitive tenacis) holding fast, gripping, clingy; firm, steadfast,
from tenere to hold (see tenet).


dendro-

word-forming element meaning tree, from Greek dendro-, comb. form of dendron tree, sometimes
especially fruit tree (as opposed to hyle timber), from PIE *der-drew-, from root *deru- to be firm,
solid, steadfast, specifically used for wood, tree (see tree (n.)).


stiffen (v.)

early 15c., make steadfast, from stiff (adj.) + -en (1). Intransitive sense from 1690s. Earlier verb
was simply stiff gain strength, become strong (late 14c.). Related: Stiffened; stiffener;
stiffening. Compare German steifen to stiffen.


inconstant (adj.)

c.1400, fickle, not steadfast, from Middle French inconstant (late 14c.), from Latin inconstantem
(nominative inconstans) changeable, fickle, capricious, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in-
(1)) + constantem (see constant). Related: Inconstantly.


pertinacity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French pertinacit&eacute; (early 15c.), from Old French pertinace obstinate,
stubborn, from Latin pertinacem (nominative pertinax) very firm, tenacious, steadfast, persevering,
from per- very (see per) + tenax (see tenacious). It drove out earlier pertinacy (late 14c.).


stability (n.)

mid-14c., firmness of resolve, mental equilibrium (of persons), from Old French stablete, establete
firmness, solidity, stability; durability, constancy (Modern French stabilit&#233;), from Latin
stabilitatem (nominative stabilitas) a standing fast, firmness, figuratively security,
steadfastness, from stabilis steadfast, firm (see stable (adj.)). In physical sense, state of being
difficult to overthrow, power of remaining upright, it is recorded from early 15c. Meaning
continuance in the same state is from 1540s.


fort (n.)

mid-15c., fortified place, stronghold, from Middle French fort, from noun use in Old French of fort
(adj.) strong, fortified (10c.), from Latin fortis strong, mighty, firm, steadfast, from Old Latin
forctus, possibly from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated, with derivatives referring to hills and
hill-forts (cognates: Sanskrit brmhati strengthens, elevates, Old High German berg hill; see barrow
(n.2)).


throne (n.)

c.1200, trone, the seat of God or a saint in heaven; c.1300 as seat occupied by a sovereign, from
Old French trone (12c., Modern French tr&#244;ne), from Latin thronus, from Greek thronos elevated
seat, chair, throne, from PIE root *dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (cognates: Latin firmus firm,
steadfast, strong, stable, Sanskrit dharma statute, law; see firm (adj.)). From late 14c. as a
symbol of royal power. Colloquial meaning toilet is recorded from 1922. The classical -h- begins to
appear in English from late 14c.


trim (v.)

mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite;
set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong, from trum strong, stable, from Proto-
Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of *deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Examples in Middle English are wanting.    Original sense is preserved in nautical phrase in
fighting trim (see trim (n.)); where the verb meant distribute the load of a ship so she floats on
an even keel (1570s). Meaning make neat by cutting is first recorded 1520s; that of decorate, adorn
is from 1540s. Sense of reduce is attested from 1966.


endure (v.)

early 14c., to undergo or suffer (especially without breaking); late 14c. to continue in existence,
from Old French endurer (12c.) make hard, harden; bear, tolerate; keep up, maintain, from Latin
indurare make hard, in Late Latin harden (the heart) against, from in- (see in- (2)) + durare to
harden, from durus hard, from PIE *dru-ro-, from root *deru- be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Replaced the important Old English verb dreogan (past tense dreag, past participle drogen), which
survives in dialectal dree. Related: Endured; endures.


steady (adj.)

1520s, firmly fixed in place or station (replacing earlier steadfast), from stead + adjectival
suffix -y (2), perhaps on model of Middle Dutch, Middle Low German stadig. Old English had
st&aelig;&eth;&eth;ig grave, serious, and stedig barren, but neither seems to be the direct source
of the modern word. Old Norse cognate sto&eth;ugr steady, stable was closer in sense. As an adverb
from c.1600.    Originally of things; of persons or minds from c.1600. Meaning working at an even
rate is first recorded in 1540s. Steady progress is etymologically a contradiction in terms. Steady
state first attested 1885; as a cosmological theory (propounded by Bondi, Gold, and Hoyle), it is
attested from 1948. Related: Steadily.


tough (adj.)

Old English toh strong and firm in texture, tenacious, sticky, from Proto-Germanic *tanhu-
(cognates: Middle Low German tege, Middle Dutch taey, Dutch taai, Old High German zach, German
z&auml;h), which Watkins suggests is from PIE *denk- to bite, from the notion of holding fast. See
rough for spelling change.    From c.1200 as strong, powerful; c.1300 as not tender or fragile;
early 14c. as difficult to chew, also hard to endure. Figurative sense of steadfast is mid-14c.;
that of hard to do, trying, laborious is from 1610s. Verb tough it endure the experience is first
recorded 1830, American English. Tough guy attested from 1901. Tough-minded first recorded 1907 in
William James. Tough luck first recorded 1912; tough shit, dismissive retort to a complaint, is from
1946.


fast (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;st firmly fixed, steadfast, secure, enclosed, probably from Proto-Germanic
*fastuz (cognates: Old Frisian fest, Old Norse fastr, Dutch vast, German fest), from PIE root *past-
firm (source of Sanskrit pastyam dwelling place).    The adverb meaning quickly, swiftly was perhaps
in Old English, or from Old Norse fast, either way developing from the sense of firmly, strongly,
vigorously (to run hard means the same as to run fast; also compare fast asleep), or perhaps from
the notion of a runner who sticks close to whatever he is chasing.    The sense of living an
unrestrained life (usually of women) is from 1746 (fast living is from 1745). Fast buck recorded
from 1947; fast food is first attested 1951. Fast-forward first recorded 1948. Fast lane is by 1966;
the fast track originally was in horse-racing (1934); figurative sense by 1960s. To fast talk
someone (v.) is recorded by 1946.


true (adj.)

Old English triewe (West Saxon), treowe (Mercian) faithful, trustworthy, honest, steady in adhering
to promises, friends, etc., from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- having or characterized by good faith
(cognates: Old Frisian triuwi, Dutch getrouw, Old High German gatriuwu, German treu, Old Norse
tryggr, Danish tryg, Gothic triggws faithful, trusty), from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the
root *deru-/*dreu- be firm, solid, steadfast (cognates: Lithuanian drutas firm, Welsh drud, Old
Irish dron strong, Welsh derw true, Old Irish derb sure), with specialized sense wood, tree and
derivatives referring to objects made of wood (see tree (n.)).    Sense of consistent with fact
first recorded c.1200; that of real, genuine, not counterfeit is from late 14c.; that of conformable
to a certain standard (as true north) is from c.1550. Of artifacts, accurately fitted or shaped it
is recorded from late 15c. True-love (n.) is Old English treowlufu. True-born (adj.) first attested
1590s. True-false (adj.) as a type of test question is recorded from 1923. To come true (of dreams,
etc.) is from 1819.


sad (adj.)

Old English s&aelig;d sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of,
from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;r, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High
German sat, German satt, Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, sated, full), from PIE *seto- (cognates: Latin
satis enough, sufficient, Greek hadros thick, bulky, Old Church Slavonic sytu, Lithuanian sotus
satiated, Old Irish saith satiety, sathach sated), from root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Sanskrit
a-sinvan insatiable).    Sense development passed through the meaning heavy, ponderous (i.e. full
mentally or physically), and weary, tired of before emerging c.1300 as unhappy. An alternative
course would be through the common Middle English sense of steadfast, firmly established, fixed (as
in sad-ware tough pewter vessels) and serious to grave. In the main modern sense, it replaced Old
English unrot, negative of rot cheerful, glad.    Meaning very bad is from 1690s. Slang sense of
inferior, pathetic is from 1899; sad sack is 1920s, popularized by World War II armed forces
(specifically by cartoon character invented by Sgt. George Baker, 1942, and published in U.S. Armed
Forces magazine Yank), probably a euphemistic shortening of common military slang phrase sad sack of
shit.


tree (n.)

Old English  treo, treow tree (also timber, wood, beam, log, stake), from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-
(cognates: Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu tree), from PIE *drew-o-,
from *deru- oak (cognates: Sanskrit dru tree, wood, daru wood, log; Greek drys oak, drymos copse,
thicket, doru beam, shaft of a spear; Old Church Slavonic drievo tree, wood; Serbian drvo tree, drva
wood; Russian drevo tree, wood; Czech drva; Polish drwa wood; Lithuanian derva pine, wood; Old Irish
daur, Welsh derwen oak, Albanian drusk oak). This is from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the root
*deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true), with specialized sense wood, tree and derivatives
referring to objects made of wood.    The line which divides trees from shrubs is largely arbitrary,
and dependent upon habit rather than size, the tree having a single trunk usually unbranched for
some distance above the ground, while a shrub has usually several stems from the same root and each
without a proper trunk. [Century Dictionary]    The widespread use of words originally meaning oak
in the sense tree probably reflects the importance of the oak to ancient Indo-Europeans. In Old
English and Middle English also thing made of wood, especially the cross of the Crucifixion and a
gallows (such as Tyburn tree, famous gallows outside London). Middle English also had plural treen,
adjective treen (Old English treowen of a tree, wooden). For Dutch boom, German Baum, the usual
words for tree, see beam (n.). Meaning framework of a saddle is from 1530s. Meaning representation
of familial relationships in the form of a tree is from c.1300. Tree-hugger, contemptuous for
environmentalist is attested by 1989.    Minc'd Pyes do not grow upon every tree,  But search the
Ovens for them, and there they be.  [Poor Robin, Almanack, 1669]


