steep (adj.)

having a sharp slope, Old English steap high, lofty; deep; prominent, projecting, from Proto-
Germanic *staupaz (cognates: Old Frisian stap high, lofty, Middle High German *stouf), from PIE
*steup-, extended form of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat, with derivations referring
to projecting objects (cognates: Greek typtein to strike, typos a blow, mold, die; Sanskrit tup-
harm, tundate pushes, stabs; Gothic stautan push; Old Norse stuttr short). The sense of precipitous
is from c.1200. The slang sense at a high price is a U.S. coinage first attested 1856. Related:
Steeply; steepness. The noun meaning steep place is from 1550s.


steepness (n.)

mid-15c., from steep (adj.) + -ness.


steep (v.)

to soak in a liquid, early 14c., of uncertain origin, originally in reference to barley or malt,
probably cognate with Old Norse steypa to pour out, throw (perhaps from an unrecorded Old English
cognate), from Proto-Germanic *staupijanan. Related: Steeped; steeping.


steepen (v.)

1847, from steep (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Steepened; steepening.


steeple (n.)

Old English stepel (Mercian), stiepel (West Saxon) high tower, related to steap high, lofty, from
Proto-Germanic *staupilaz (see steep (adj.)). Also the name of a lofty style of women's head-dress
from the 14th century. Steeple-house (1640s) was the old Quaker way of referring to a church
edifice, to avoid in that sense using church, which had with them a more restricted meaning.


precipice (n.)

steep face of rock, 1630s, from Middle French pr&eacute;cipice, from Latin praecipitium a steep
place, literally a fall or leap, from praeceps (genitive praecipitis) steep, headlong, headfirst,
from prae before, forth (see pre-) + caput head (see head (n.)). Earlier in English as a verb
(1590s) meaning fall to great depth.


arduous (adj.)

1530s, hard to accomplish, difficult to do, from Latin arduus high, steep, also figuratively,
difficult, from PIE root *eredh- to grow, high (see ortho-). Literal sense of high, steep, difficult
to climb, attested in English from 1709.


ortho-

before vowels orth-, word-forming element meaning straight, upright, rectangular, regular; true,
correct, proper, now mostly in scientific and technical compounds, from Greek ortho-, stem of orthos
straight, true, correct, regular, from PIE *eredh- high (cognates: Sanskrit urdhvah high, lofty,
steep, Latin arduus high, steep, Old Irish ard high).


precipitious (adj.)

1610s, now obsolete, but prefered by purists for the sense high and steep over the later formation
precipitous.


cliff (n.)

Old English clif rock, promontory, steep slope, from Proto-Germanic *kliban (cognates: Old Saxon
clif, Old Norse klif, Middle Dutch klippe, Dutch klip, Old High German klep, German Klippe cliff,
promontory, steep rock).   Clift has been a variant spelling since 15c. and was common in early
Modern English, influenced by or merged with clift, a variant of cleft (n.). Cliff-dweller first
attested 1889, American English.


escarp (n.)

steep slope, 1680s, from French escarpe (16c.), from Italian scarpa (see scarp).


gradient (n.)

steep slope of a road or railroad, 1835, principally in American English, from grade (n.) by analogy
of quotient, etc. It was used 17c. as an adjective, of animals, characterized by walking; in that
case probably from Latin gradientem, present participle of gradi to walk.


stalk (v.2)

walk haughtily (nearly the opposite meaning of stalk (v.1)), 1520s, perhaps from stalk (n.) with a
notion of long, awkward strides, or from Old English stealcung a stalking, act of going stealthily,
related to stealc steep, lofty.


stub (n.)

Old English stybb stump of a tree, from Proto-Germanic *stubjaz (cognates: Middle Dutch stubbe, Old
Norse stubbr), from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Extended
14c. to other short, thick, protruding things. Meaning remaining part of something partially
consumed is from 1520s.


Stilton (n.)

1736, cheese made famous by a coaching inn at Stilton on the Great North Road from London, the owner
being from Leicestershire, where the cheese was made. Since 1969 restricted to cheese made in
Leicester, Derby, and Nottingham counties by members of the Stilton Cheese Makers Association. The
place name is in Domesday Book as Stichiltone and probably means literally farmstead or village at a
stile or steep ascent.


rappel (n.)

1931, mountaineering technique for descending steep faces, from French rappel, literally recall (Old
French rapel), from rapeler to recall, summon (see repeal (v.)). The same word had been borrowed
earlier (1848) to mean a drum roll to summon soldiers.


escarpment (n.)

1802, from French escarpment, from escarper make into a steep slope, from escarpe slope, from
Italian scarpa (see scarp). Earlier in same sense was escarp.


scarp (n.)

steep slope, 1580s, from Italian scarpa slope, probably from a Germanic source, perhaps Gothic
skarpo pointed object, from Proto-Germanic *skarpa- cutting, sharp (cognates: Middle High German
schroffe sharp rock, crag, Old English scr&aelig;f cave, grave), from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear (v.)).


baptize (v.)

c.1300, from Old French batisier (11c.), from Latin baptizare, from Greek baptizein immerse, dip in
water, also figuratively, be over one's head (in debt, etc.), to be soaked (in wine); in Greek
Christian usage, baptize; from baptein to dip, steep, dye, color, from PIE root *gwabh- to dip,
sink. Christian baptism originally consisted in full immersion. Related: Baptized; baptizing.


imbrue (v.)

early 15c., to soak, steep; mid-15c., to stain, soil, from Old French embreuvere to moisten, a
metathesis of embeuvrer, from em- (see im-) + -bevrer, ultimately from Latin bibere to drink (see
imbibe). Or perhaps from Old French embroue soiled, ultimately from boue mud, dirt.


brae (n.)

steep slope, in northern England especially the sides of a hill, early 14c., from Scottish, slope,
river bank, from Old Norse bra eyelash, cognate with Old English br&aelig;w eyelid, German Braue
eyebrow (see brow). The word must have passed through the sense of 'eye-brow' to 'brow of a hill',
supercilium (cf. OE. eaghill 'eye-hill'=eyebrow) [OED].


precipitate (v.)

to hurl or fling down, 1520s, a back formation from precipitation or else from Latin praecipitatus,
past participle of praecipitare to throw or dive headlong, from praeceps steep, headlong, headfirst
(see precipice). Meaning to cause to happen, hurry the beginning of is recorded from 1620s. Chemical
sense is from 1620s; meteorological sense first attested 1863. Related: Precipitated; precipitating.


rot (v.)

Old English rotian to decay, putrefy, from Proto-Germanic *rutjan (cognates: Old Saxon roton, Old
Norse rotna, Old Frisian rotia, Middle Dutch roten, Dutch rotten, Old High German rozzen to rot,
German r&ouml;&szlig;en to steep flax), from stem *rut-. Related: Rotted; rotting.


iniquity (n.)

c.1300, hostility, malevolence; a hostile action, from Old French iniquit&eacute; wickedness,
unfavorable situation, from Latin iniquitatem (nominative iniquitas) unequalness, unevenness,
injustice, noun of quality from iniquus unjust, unequal; slanting, steep, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ aequus just, equal (see equal (adj.)). For vowel change, see acquisition. Meaning evil, wickedness
is from late 14c.


souse (v.)

late 14c., to pickle, steep in vinegar, from Old French sous (adj.) preserved in salt and vinegar,
from Frankish *sultja or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon sultia salt water, Old High
German sulza brine), from Proto-Germanic *salt- (see salt (n.)). Related: Soused; sousing.


precipitation (n.)

late 15c., a casting down (of the evil angels from heaven), also, in alchemy separation of a solid
substance from a solution, from Middle French precipitation (15c.) and directly from Latin
praecipitationem (nominative praecipitatio) act or fact of falling headlong, haste, noun of action
from past participle stem of praecipitare fall, be hasty, from praeceps steep (see precipice).
Meaning sudden haste is c.1500. Meaning act of falling from a height is attested from 1610s.
Meteorological sense of rain, snow, dew, etc. is from 1670s.


stoop (v.)

bend forward, Old English stupian to bow, bend, from Proto-Germanic *stup- (cognates: Middle Dutch
stupen to bow, bend, Norwegian stupa fall, drop), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat
(see steep (adj.)). Figurative sense of condescend, especially expressing a lowering of the moral
self, is from 1570s. Sense of swoop is first recorded 1570s in falconry. Related: Stooped; stooping.
The noun meaning an act of stooping is from c.1300. Stoop-shouldered attested from 1773.


stutter (v.)

1560s, frequentative form of stutt to stutter, from Middle English stutten to stutter, stammer (late
14c.), cognate with Middle Low German stoten to knock, strike against, collide, from Proto-Germanic
*staut- push, thrust (cognates: Old English stotan, Old High German stozan, Gothic stautan to push,
thrust), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to hit, beat, knock against (see steep (adj.)). The noun is attested
from 1854. Related: Stuttered; stuttering; stutterer.


macerate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from maceration or else from Latin maceratus, past participle of
macerare soften, make soft, soak, steep, related to maceria garden wall, originally of kneaded clay,
from PIE *mak-ero-, suffixed form of root *mag- to knead (cognates: Greek magis kneaded mass, cake,
mageus one who kneads, baker; Old Church Slavonic mazo to anoint, smear; Breton meza to knead;
Middle Irish maistir to churn), also to fashion, fit (compare make (v.)). Related: Macerated;
macerating.


loop (v.)

to form a loop, c.1400, draw (a leash through a ring), from loop (n.). Related: Looped; looping.
Slang looped drunk is from 1934. Loop the loop (1900) originally was in reference to roller-coasters
at amusement parks.    Loop-the-Loop is the name of a new entertainment which goes further in the
way of tempting Providence than anything yet invented. The Loop is an immense circle of track in the
air. A car on a mimic railway shoots down a very steep incline, and is impelled around the inner
side of this loop. ... The authorities at Coney Island are said to have prohibited looping-the-loop
because women break their corset strings in their efforts to catch their breath as they sweep down
the incline, and moreover, a young man is reported to have ruptured a blood vessel in his liver.
[Philadelphia Medical Journal, Aug. 10, 1901]


stint (v.)

to be sparing or frugal, 1722, earlier to limit, restrain (1510s), cause to cease, put an end to
(mid-14c.), cease, desist (intransitive), c.1200, from Old English styntan to blunt, make dull,
probably originally make short, from Proto-Germanic *stuntijanan (cognates: Old Norse stuttr short,
scant, Middle High German stunz blunt, short, German stutzen to cut short, curtail, stop, hesitate),
from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). The English word perhaps
was influenced by its Scandinavian cognates. Sense of be careful in expenditure is from 1848.
Related: Stinted; stinting. The noun is attested from c.1300.


riparian (adj.)

of or pertaining to river banks, 1849, with -an + Latin riparius of a river bank, from riparia
shore, later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa (steep) bank of a
river, shore, probably literally break (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream
bed), or else that which is cut out by the river, from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(cognates: Greek ereipia ruins, eripne slope, precipice; Old Norse rifa break, to tear apart; Danish
rift breach, Middle High German rif riverbank, seashore; English riven, rift).


veep (n.)

1949, American English, apparently coined from V.P., abbreviation of vice president, perhaps modeled
on jeep, which was then in vogue. Introduced by Alben W. Barkley (1877-1956), Harry Truman's vice
president. According to the Saturday Evening Post, his grandchildren, finding Vice-President too
long, call him that. The magazines quickly picked it up, especially when the 71-year-old Barkley
married a 38-year-old widow (dubbed the Veepess).    Barkley says word Veep is not copyrighted, and
any vice president who wants to can use it. But he hopes not many will. [U.S. Department of State
wireless bulletin, 1949]    Time, tongue in cheek, suggested the president should be Peep, the
Secretary of State Steep, and the Secretary of Labor Sleep.


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


type (n.)

late 15c., symbol, emblem, from Latin typus figure, image, form, kind, from Greek typos a blow,
dent, impression, mark, effect of a blow; figure in relief, image, statue; anything wrought of metal
or stone; general form, character; outline, sketch, from root of typtein to strike, beat, from PIE
*tup-, variant of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Extended 1713
to printing blocks with letters carved on them in relief. The meaning general form or character of
some kind, class is attested in English from 1843, though it had that sense in Latin and Greek. To
be (someone's) type be the sort of person that person is attracted to is recorded from 1934.


path (n.)

Old English pa&thorn;, p&aelig;&thorn; path, track, from West Germanic *patha- (cognates: Old
Frisian path, Middle Dutch pat, Dutch pad, Old High German pfad, German Pfad path), of uncertain
origin. The original initial -p- in a Germanic word is an etymological puzzle. Don Ringe (From
Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic, Oxford 2006) describes it as An obvious loan from Iranian
..., clearly borrowed after Grimmâ&euro;&trade;s Law had run its course. Watkins says the word is
probably borrowed (? via Scythian) from Iranian *path-, from PIE root *pent- to tread, go, pass
(source of Avestan patha way; see find (v.)), but this is too much of a stretch for OED and others.
In Scotland and Northern England, commonly a steep ascent of a hill or in a road.


stupid (adj.)

1540s, mentally slow, lacking ordinary activity of mind, dull, inane, from Middle French stupide
(16c.) and directly from Latin stupidus amazed, confounded; dull, foolish, literally struck
senseless, from stupere be stunned, amazed, confounded, from PIE *stupe- hit, from root *(s)teu- (1)
to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Related: Stupidly; stupidness.    Native words for
this idea include negative compounds with words for wise (Old English unwis, unsnotor, ungleaw),
also dol (see dull (adj.)), and dysig (see dizzy (adj.)). Stupid retained its association with
stupor and its overtones of stunned by surprise, grief, etc. into mid-18c. The difference between
stupid and the less opprobrious foolish roughly parallels that of German t&ouml;richt vs. dumm but
does not exist in most European languages.


step-

Old English steop-, with connotations of loss, in combinations like steopcild orphan, related to
astiepan, bestiepan to bereave, to deprive of parents or children, from Proto-Germanic *steupa-
bereft (cognates: Old Frisian stiap-, Old Norse stjup-, Swedish styv-, Middle Low German stef-,
Dutch stief-, Old High German stiof-, German stief-), literally pushed out, from PIE *steup-, from
root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, with derivatives referring to fragments (see steep (adj.)).
Barnhart suggests the forms in -f- are by assimilation of the first sound in following words for
father.    Etymologically, a stepfather or stepmother is one who becomes father or mother to an
orphan, but the notion of orphanage faded in 20c. and came to denote simply relation through
marriage. For sense evolution, compare Latin privignus stepson, related to privus deprived. Compare
orphan (n.).


study (v.)

early 12c., to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate (translating Latin occupatur), from Old
French estudiier to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine (13c., Modern French
&eacute;tudier), from Medieval Latin studiare, from Latin studium study, application, originally
eagerness, from studere to be diligent (to be pressing forward), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push,
stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Martha swanc and becarcade to gefor&eth;igene &thorn;an
H&aelig;lende and his &thorn;eowen &thorn;a lichamlice behef&eth;en. Seo studdede emb &thorn;a
uterlice &thorn;ing. [Homily for the Feast of the Virgin Mary, c.1125]    From c.1300 as apply
oneself to the acquisition of learning, pursue a formal course of study, also read a book or
writings intently or meditatively. From mid-14c. as reflect, muse, think, ponder. Meaning regard
attentively is from 1660s. Related: Studied; studying.


short (adj.)

Old English sceort, scort short, not long, not tall; brief, probably from Proto-Germanic *skurta-
(cognates: Old Norse skorta to be short of, skort shortness; Old High German scurz short), from PIE
root *(s)ker- (1) to cut, with notion of something cut off (cognates: Sanskrit krdhuh shortened,
maimed, small; Latin curtus short, cordus late-born, originally stunted in growth; Old Church
Slavonic kratuku, Russian korotkij short; Lithuanian skurstu to be stunted, skardus steep; Old Irish
cert small, Middle Irish corr stunted, dwarfish).    Meaning having an insufficient quantity is from
1690s. Meaning rude is attested from late 14c. Meaning easily provoked is from 1590s; perhaps the
notion is of being not long in tolerating. Short fuse in figurative sense of quick temper first
attested 1968. To fall short is from archery. Short run relatively brief period of time is from
1879. Short story first recorded 1877. To make short work of dispose of quickly is first attested
1570s. Phrase short and sweet is from 1530s. To be short by the knees (1733) was to be kneeling; to
be short by the head (1540s) was to be beheaded.


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


