stem-winder (n.)

excellent thing (especially a rousing speech), 1892, from stem-winding watches (1875), which were
advanced and desirable when introduced. See stem (n.) + wind (v.1).


stem (v.1)

to hold back, early 14c., from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse stemma to stop, dam up; be
stopped, abate, from Proto-Germanic *stamjan (cognates: Swedish st&auml;mma, Old Saxon stemmian,
Middle Dutch stemon, German stemmen stop, resist, oppose), from PIE root *stem- to strike against
something (cognates: Lithuanian stumiu thrust, push). Not connected to stem (n.). Related: Stemmed;
stemming. Phrase to stem the tide is literally to hold back the tide, but often is confused with
stem (v.2) make headway against.    Verbal phrase stems from (1932, American English), perhaps is
from stem (v.) in the sense to rise, mount up, have origin in (1570s), or is influenced by or
translates German stammen aus, probably from a figurative sense represented by English stem (n.) in
the sense of stock of a family, line of descent (c.1540; cognates: family tree, and German
stammvater tribal ancestor, literally stem-father).


stem (v.2)

make headway by sailing, head in a certain course, late 14c., literally to push the stem through,
from stem (n.) in the ship post sense (here the post at the prow of the ship). Related: Stemmed;
stemming.


stem (n.)

Old English stemn, stefn stem of a plant, trunk of a tree, also either end-post of a ship, from
Proto-Germanic *stamniz (cognates: Old Saxon stamm, Old Norse stafn stem of a ship; Danish stamme,
Swedish stam trunk of a tree; Old High German stam, German Stamm), from suffixed form of PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet).    Meaning support of a wineglass is from 1835. Meaning unchanging part
of a word is from 1830. Stems slang for legs is from 1860. The nautical sense is preserved in the
phrase stem to stern along the full length (of a ship), attested from 1620s. Stem cell attested by
1885.


lapidation (n.)

stoning to death, 1610s, from Latin lapidationem (nominative lapidatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of lapidare to throw stones at, from the stem of lapis stone.


ulceration (n.)

c.1400, from Latin ulcerationem (nominative ulceratio), noun of action from past participle stem of
ulcerare to make sore, from stem of ulcus (see ulcer).


horripilation (n.)

from Late Latin horripilationem (nominative horripilatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of horripilare, from stem of horrere to bristle (see horror) + pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


lucubration (n.)

1590s, literary work showing signs of too-careful elaboration, from Latin lucubrationem (nominative
lucubratio) nocturnal study, night work, noun of action from past participle stem of lucubrare,
literally to work by artificial light, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


indication (n.)

early 15c., from Latin indicationem (nominative indicatio) an indicating; valuation, noun of action
from past participle stem of indicare point out, show, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
dicare proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction).


munificence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French munificence, from Latin munificentia bountifulness, liberality,
generosity, from stem of munificus generous, bountiful, liberal, literally present-making, from
munus gift or service, duty, office (see municipal) + unstressed stem of facere to do (see
factitious).


rapacious (adj.)

1650s, from Latin rapaci-, stem of rapax grasping, itself from stem of rapere to seize (see
rapacity) + -ous. Related: Rapaciously; rapaciousness.


lucifugous (adj.)

shunning the light, 1650s, from Latin lucifugus, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)) +
stem of fugax apt to flee, timid, figuratively transitory, fleeting, from fugere to flee (see
fugitive).


simulation (n.)

mid-14c., a false show, false profession, from Old French simulation pretence and directly from
Latin simulationem (nominative simulatio) an imitating, feigning, false show, hypocrisy, noun of
action from past participle stem of simulare imitate, from stem of similis like (see similar).
Meaning a model or mock-up for purposes of experiment or training is from 1954.


suppuration (n.)

early 15c., from French suppuration or directly from Latin suppurationem (nominative suppuratio),
noun of action from past participle stem of suppurare form or discharge pus, from sub under (see
sub-) + stem of pus (see pus).


stalag (n.)

German POW camp, 1940, from German Stalag, short for stammlager main camp, from Old High German stam
stem, from Proto-Germanic *stamniz (see stem (n.)).


tribulation (n.)

c.1200, from Old French tribulacion (12c.), from Church Latin tribulationem (nominative tribulatio)
distress, trouble, affliction, noun of action from past participle stem of tribulare to oppress,
afflict, a figurative use by Christian writers of Latin tribulare to press, also possibly to thresh
out grain, from tribulum threshing sledge, from stem of terere to rub (see throw (v.)) + -bulum,
suffix forming names of tools.


catheter (n.)

c.1600, from French cath&eacute;ter, from Late Latin catheter a catheter, from Greek katheter
surgical catheter, literally anything let down, from stem of kathienai to let down, thrust in, from
kata down (see cata-) + stem of hienai to send (see jet (v.)). Earlier was cathirum (early 15c.),
directly from Medieval Latin. Related: Catheterization; catheterized; catheterizing.


vanquish (v.)

mid-14c., to defeat in battle, conquer, from Old French venquis-, extended stem of veintre to
defeat, from Latin vincere defeat (see victor). Influenced in Middle English by Middle French
vainquiss-, present stem of vainquir conquer, from Old French vainkir, alteration of veintre.
Related: Vanquished; vanquishing.


parotid (adj.)

situated near the ear, 1680s, from French parotide (1540s), or directly from Latin parotid-, stem of
parotis, from Greek parotis tumor near the ear, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + ot-, stem of ous
ear (see ear (n.1)). As a noun, the parotid gland.


participation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French participacion (13c.) and directly from Late Latin participationem
(nominative participatio) partaking, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin participare
participate in, share in, partake of; to make partaker, to share, impart, from particeps (genitive
participis) partaker, comrade, fellow soldier, also, as an adjective, sharing, partaking, from pars
(genitive partis) part (see part (n.)) + -cip-, weak form of stem of capere to take (see capable).


propitiation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin propitiationem (nominative propitiatio) an atonement, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin propitiare appease, propitiate, from propitius favorable, gracious,
kind, well-disposed, from pro- forward (see pro-) + stem related to petere to make for, go to; seek,
strive after; ask for, beg, beseech, request (see petition (n.)).    The sense in Latin is perhaps
because the word originally was religious, literally a falling or rushing toward, hence eager, and,
of the gods, well-disposed. Earliest recorded form of the word in English is propitiatorium the
mercy seat, place of atonement (c.1200), translating Greek hilasterion.


garnish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French garniss-, present participle stem of garnir provide, furnish; fortify,
reinforce, from a Germanic stem related to Proto-Germanic *warnejan be cautious, guard, provide for
(cognates: Old High German warnon to take heed, Old English warnian to take warning, beware; see
warn). Sense evolution is from arm oneself to fit out to embellish, which was the earliest meaning
in English, though the others also were used in Middle English. Culinary sense of to decorate a dish
for the table predominated after c.1700. Older meaning survives in legal sense of warning of
attachment of funds (1570s). Related: Garnished; garnishing.


caulis (n.)

stem or stalk of a plant, Latin; see cole.


Ira

masc. proper name, from Hebrew, literally watchful, from stem of 'ur to awake, to rouse oneself.


bine (n.)

climbing stem, flexible shoot of a shrub, 1727, from a dialectal form of bind (n.).


kex (n.)

dry, hollow plant stem, late 14c., of uncertain origin. Klein says ultimately from Latin cicuta
hemlock.


Hannah

fem. proper name, biblical mother of the prophet Samuel, from Hebrew, literally graciousness, from
stem of hanan he was gracious, showed favor.


abomination (n.)

early 14c., abominable thing or action; late 14c., feeling of disgust, hatred, loathing, from Old
French abominacion abomination, horror, repugnance, disgust (13c.), from Latin abominationem
(nominative abominatio) abomination, noun of action from past participle stem of abominari shun as
an ill omen, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + omin-, stem of omen (see omen). Meaning intensified
by folk etymology derivation from Latin ab homine away from man, thus beastly.    Doubtless, the
life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater Number require that it shall be hard.
If a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life? Are the houses and doors and
churches in Flatland to be altered in order to accommodate such monsters? [Edwin Abbot, Flatland: A
Romance of Many Dimensions, 1885]


cauline (adj.)

pertaining to or growing on a stem, 1756, from Latin caulis stalk (see cole).


de

Latin adverb and preposition of separation in space, meaning down from, off, away from, and
figuratively concerning, by reason of, according to; from PIE demonstrative stem *de- (see to).


dilution (n.)

1640s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin diluere (see dilute).


inhalation (n.)

1620s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin inhalare (see inhale).


retrospection (n.)

1630s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin retrospicere (see retrospect).


-phage

word-forming element meaning eater, from stem of Greek phagein to eat (see -phagous).


circumvolution (n.)

mid-15c., noun of action from past participle stem of Latin circumvolvere to revolve through, to
roll around (see circumvolve).


emersion (n.)

1630s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin emergere (see emerge). Originally of
eclipses and occultations.


reformatory (adj.)

1704, from past participle stem of Latin reformare to transform, change (see reform (v.)). As a
noun, house of correction for juveniles, from 1758.


pontification (n.)

1520s, office of a bishop, noun of action from past participle stem of Medieval Latin pontificare
(see pontificate (v.)). Meaning something pontificated is from 1925.


compositor (n.)

a typesetter engaged in picking up arranging and distributing letters or type in a printing office,
1560s, agent noun from past participle stem of Latin componere (see composite).


thyrsus (n.)

1590s, from Latinized form of Greek thyrsos, literally stalk or stem of a plant, a non-Greek word of
unknown origin. The staff or spear, tipped with an ornament like a pine cone and sometimes wreathed
in ivy and vine branches, borne by Dionysus and his votaries.


Judah

masc. proper name, biblical son of Jacob by Leah, also the name of a tribe of Israel, from Hebrew
Yehudah, from stem of y-d-h, literally praised.


exuviae (n.)

1660s, Latin, literally that which is stripped off, hence clothing, equipment, arms, booty, spoils,
from stem of exuere, from PIE *eis- to dress.


Negus

title of the ruler of Abyssinia, 1590s, from Amharic negush king, from stem of nagasha he forced,
ruled.


Rama

incarnation of Vishnu, from Sanskrit Ramah, literally lovely, from stem of ramate stands still,
rests, is pleased.


Levi

masc. proper name, biblical son of Jacob by Leah, from Hebrew lewi, literally joining, pledging,
attached, from stem of lawah he joined.


runner (n.)

c.1300, messenger on foot, agent noun from run (v.). Meaning one who runs is early 14c. Meaning
smuggler first recorded 1721; sense of police officer is from 1771. Meaning rooting stem of a plant
is from 1660s; that of embroidered cloth for a table is from 1888.


Hosea

masc. proper name, from Hebrew Hoshea, literally salvation, from stem y-sh- to save.


scat (n.2)

filth, dung, 1950, from Greek stem skat- dung (see scatology).


whorl (n.)

mid-15c., the small flywheel of a spindle, perhaps an alteration of whirl. Meaning circlar
arrangement of leaves or flowers round a stem of a plant is first recorded 1550s. Of seashells or
other spiral structures, from 1828. Related: Whorled.


cognizable (adj.)

1670s, capable of being known, also liable to be tried in a given court or jurisdiction, from stem
of cognizance + -able.


