stench (n.)

Old English stenc a smell, odor, scent, fragrance (either pleasant or unpleasant), from Proto-
Germanic *stankwiz (cognates: Old Saxon stanc, Old High German stanch, German stank). Related to
stincan emit a smell (see stink (v.)) as drench is to drink. It tended toward bad smell in Old
English (as a verb, only with this sense), and the notion of evil smell has predominated since
c.1200.


smell (n.)

odor, aroma, stench, late 12c.; faculty of perceiving by the nose, c.1200; see smell (v.). Ousted
Old English stenc (see stench) in most senses.


bromine (n.)

nonmetallic element, 1827, from French brome, from Greek bromos stench. With chemical suffix -ine
(2). The evil-smelling dark red liquid was discovered by French chemist Antoine J&eacute;r&ocirc;me
Balard (1802-1876), who initially called it muride.


clench (v.)

Old English (be)clencan to hold fast, make cling, causative of clingan (see cling); compare
stench/stink. Related: Clenched; clenching.


reek (n.)

Old English rec (Anglian), riec (West Saxon), smoke from burning material, probably from a
Scandinavian source such as Old Norse reykr, Danish r&#511;g, Swedish r&#246;k smoke, steam,  from
Proto-Germanic *raukiz (cognates: Old Frisian rek, Middle Dutch rooc, Old High German rouh, German
Rauch smoke, steam), from PIE *reug- to vomit, belch; also smoke, cloud. Sense of stench is attested
1650s, via the notion of that which rises (compare reek (v.)).


apartheid (n.)

1947 (policy begun 1948), from Afrikaans apartheid (1929 in a South African socio-political
context), literally separateness, from Dutch apart separate (from French &agrave;part; see apart) +
suffix -heid, cognate of English -hood. The official English synonym was separate development
(1955).Segregation is such an active word that it suggests someone is trying to segregate someone
else. So the word apartheid was introduced. Now it has such a stench in the nostrils of the world,
they are referring to autogenous development. [Alan Paton, New York Times, Oct. 24, 1960]


weasel (n.)

Old English weosule, wesle weasel, from Proto-Germanic *wisulon (cognates: Old Norse visla, Middle
Dutch wesel, Dutch wezel, Old High German wisula, German Wiesel), probably related to Proto-Germanic
*wisand- bison (see bison), with a base sense of stinking animal, because both animals have a foul,
musky smell (compare Latin vissio stench). A John Wesilheued (John Weaselhead) turns up on the
Lincolnshire Assize Rolls for 1384, but the name seems not to have endured, for some reason.
Related: Weaselly.


stink (v.)

Old English stincan emit a smell of any kind; exhale; rise (of dust, vapor, etc.) (class III strong
verb; past tense stanc, past participle stuncen), common West Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon stincan,
West Frisian stjonke, Old High German stinkan, Dutch stinken), from the root of stench. Old English
had swote stincan to smell sweet, but offensive sense also was in Old English and predominated by
mid-13c.; smell now tends the same way. Figurative meaning be offensive is from early 13c.; meaning
be inept is recorded from 1924. To stink to high heaven first recorded 1963.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


