stereotype (v.)

1804, to cast a stereotype plate, from stereotype (n.). From 1819 in the figurative sense fix firmly
or unchangeably. By 1953 as assign preconceived and oversimplified notion of characteristics typical
of a person or group. Related: Stereotyped; stereotyping.


stereotype (n.)

1798, method of printing from a plate, from French st&eacute;r&eacute;otype (adj.) printed by means
of a solid plate of type, from Greek stereos solid (see stereo-) + French type type (see type (n.)).
Meaning a stereotype plate is from 1817. Meaning image perpetuated without change is first recorded
1850, from the verb in this sense. Meaning preconceived and oversimplified notion of characteristics
typical of a person or group is recorded from 1922.


cliche (n.)

1825, electrotype, stereotype, from French clich&eacute;, a technical word in printer's jargon for
stereotype block, noun use of past participle of clicher to click (18c.), supposedly echoic of the
sound of a mold striking molten metal. Figurative extension to trite phrase, worn-out expression is
first attested 1888, following the course of stereotype. Related: Cliched (1928).


stereotyping (n.)

1807, verbal noun from stereotype (v.). Figurative sense from 1888.


Nimrod

great hunter, 1712, a reference to the biblical son of Cush, referred to (Gen. x:8-9) as a mighty
hunter before the Lord. It came to mean geek, klutz by 1983 in teenager slang, for unknown reasons.
(Amateur theories include its occasional use in Bugs Bunny cartoon episodes featuring rabbit-hunting
Elmer Fudd as a foil; its possible ironic use, among hunters, for a clumsy member of their
fraternity; or a stereotype of deer hunters by the non-hunting population in the U.S.)


stereotypical (adj.)

1949, in the figurative sense, from stereotype (n.) + -ical. Stereotypic is from 1801 in the literal
sense.


stereo

1823 as a shortening of stereotype (n.); 1876 as a shortening of stereoscope; 1954 as a shortening
of stereophonic (adj.); the noun meaning stereophonic record or tape player is recorded from 1964.


please (v.)

early 14c., to be agreeable, from Old French plaisir to please, give pleasure to, satisfy (11c.,
Modern French plaire, the form of which is perhaps due to analogy of faire), from Latin placere to
be acceptable, be liked, be approved, related to placare to soothe, quiet (source of Spanish placer,
Italian piacere), possibly from PIE *plak-e- to be calm, via notion of still water, etc., from root
*plak- (1) to be flat (see placenta).    Meaning to delight in English is from late 14c. Inverted
use for to be pleased is from c.1500, first in Scottish, and paralleling the evolution of synonymous
like (v.). Intransitive sense (do as you please) first recorded c.1500; imperative use (please do
this), first recorded 1620s, was probably a shortening of if it please (you) (late 14c.). Related:
Pleased; pleasing; pleasingly.    Verbs for please supply the stereotype polite word (Please come
in, short for may it please you to ...) in many languages (French, Italian), But more widespread is
the use of the first singular of a verb for 'ask, request'  [Buck, who cites German bitte, Polish
prosz&#281;, etc.]. Spanish favor is short for hace el favor do the favor. Danish has in this sense
v&aelig;r saa god, literally be so good.


