stifle (v.)

late 14c., to choke, suffocate, drown, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Old French
estouffer to stifle, smother (Modern French &#233;touffer), itself of uncertain origin, perhaps from
a Germanic source (compare Old High German stopfon to plug up, stuff). Metaphoric sense is from
1570s. Related: Stifled; stifling.


smother (v.)

c.1200, to suffocate with smoke, from smother (n.), earlier smorthre dense, suffocating smoke (late
12c.), from stem of Old English smorian to suffocate, choke, strangle, stifle, cognate with Middle
Dutch smoren, German schmoren; possibly connected to smolder. Meaning to kill by suffocation in any
manner is from 1540s; sense of to extinguish a fire is from 1590s. Sense of stifle, repress is first
recorded 1570s; meaning to cover thickly (with some substance) is from 1590s. Related: Smothered;
smothering.


suffocate (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), deprive of air, choke, kill by preventing access of air to the lungs, also
figurative, stifle, smother, extinguish, from Latin suffocatus, past participle of suffocare to
choke (see suffocation). Intransitive use, become choked, stifled, or smothered, is from 1702.
Related: Suffocated; suffocating.


suffocation (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French suffocation, from Latin suffocationem (nominative suffocatio) a
choking, stifling, noun of action from past participle stem of suffocare suffocate, throttle,
stifle, strangle, originally to narrow up, from sub up (from under) (see sub-) + fauces (plural)
throat, narrow entrance (see faucet).


suppress (v.)

late 14c. (implied in suppressing) be burdensome; 1520s as put down by force or authority, from
Latin suppressus, past participle of supprimere press down, stop, hold back, check, stifle, from sub
down, under (see sub-) + premere push against (see press (v.1)). Sense of prevent or prohibit the
circulation of is from 1550s of publications; medical use from 1620s. Related: Suppressed;
suppressing.


strangle (v.)

late 13c., from Old French estrangler choke, suffocate, throttle (Modern French &#233;trangler),
from Latin strangulare to choke, stifle, check, constrain, from Greek strangalan to choke, twist,
from strangale a halter, cord, lace, related to strangos twisted, from PIE root *strenk- tight,
narrow; pull tight, twist (see string (n.)). Related: Strangled; strangling.


stop (v.)

Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian to stop up, stifle), a general West Germanic word, cognate
with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low German stoppen, Old High German stopfon,
German stopfen to plug, stop up, Old Low Frankish (be)stuppon to stop (the ears).    These words are
said by many sources to be a Germanic borrowing of Vulgar Latin *stuppare to stop or stuff with tow
or oakum (source of Italian stoppare, French &eacute;touper to stop with tow), from Latin stuppa
coarse part of flax, tow. In support of this theory, it is said that plugs made of tow were used
from ancient times in Rhine valley. Century Dictionary says this suits phonetically, but is on
grounds of meaning somewhat doubtful. Barnhart, for one, proposes the whole Germanic group might be
native, from a base *stoppon.     Sense of bring or come to a halt, discontinue (mid-15c.) is from
notion of preventing a flow by blocking a hole, and the word's development in this sense is unique
to English, though it since has been widely adopted in other languages; perhaps influenced by Latin
stupere be stunned, be stupefied. Intransitive meaning check oneself is from 1680s. Meaning make a
halt or stay, tarry is from 1711. Stop-light is from 1922; stop-sign is from 1918. Stop-motion is
from 1851, originally of looms. Related: Stopped; stopping.


