stigmatism (n.)

1660s, a branding, from Greek stigmatizein, from stigmat-, stem of stigma (see stigma). Meaning
condition of being affected with stigmata is from 1897.


stigma (n.)

1590s (earlier stigme, c.1400), mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron, from Latin stigma
(plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) mark of a pointed instrument, puncture,
tattoo-mark, brand, from root of stizein to mark, tattoo, from PIE root *steig- to stick; pointed
(see stick (v.)).    Figurative meaning a mark of disgrace in English is from 1610s. Stigmas marks
resembling the wounds on the body of Christ, appearing supernaturally on the bodies of the devout is
from 1630s; earlier stigmate (late 14c.), from Latin stigmata.


stigmatize (v.)

1580s, to brand or tattoo, from Medieval Latin stigmatizare, from Greek stigmatizein, from stigmat-,
stem of stigma (see stigma). Meaning to blemish is from 1610s (figurative), 1630s (literal).
Related: Stigmatized; stigmatizing.


stigmatic (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin stigmaticus, from stigmat-, stem of Greek stigma (see stigma), + -ic.
Related: Stigmatical (1580s).


astigmatism (n.)

1849, coined by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, from Greek a- without (see
a- (3)) + stigmatos genitive of stigma a mark, spot, puncture (see stick (v.)).


narrate (v.)

1748, back-formation from narration or else from Latin narratus, past participle of narrare to tell,
relate, recount (see narration). Richardson and Johnson call it Scottish [OED], a stigma which kept
it from general use until 19c. A few mid-17c. instances are traceable to Spanish narrar. Related:
Narrated; narrating.


bastard (n.)

illegitimate child, early 13c., from Old French bastard (11c., Modern French b&acirc;tard),
acknowledged child of a nobleman by a woman other than his wife, probably from fils de bast
packsaddle son, meaning a child conceived on an improvised bed (saddles often doubled as beds while
traveling), with pejorative ending -art (see -ard). Alternative possibly is that the word is from
Proto-Germanic *banstiz barn, equally suggestive of low origin.    Not always regarded as a stigma;
the Conqueror is referred to in state documents as William the Bastard. Figurative sense of
something not pure or genuine is late 14c.; use as a vulgar term of abuse for a man is attested from
1830. As an adjective from late 14c. Among the bastard words in Halliwell-Phillipps' Dictionary of
Archaic and Provincial Words are avetrol, chance-bairn, by-blow, harecoppe, horcop, and gimbo (a
bastard's bastard).


stick (v.)

Old English stician to pierce, stab, transfix, goad, also to remain embedded, stay fixed, be
fastened, from Proto-Germanic *stik- pierce, prick, be sharp (cognates: Old Saxon stekan, Old
Frisian steka, Dutch stecken, Old High German stehhan, German stechen to stab, prick), from PIE
*steig- to stick; pointed (cognates: Latin instigare to goad, instinguere to incite, impel; Greek
stizein to prick, puncture, stigma mark made by a pointed instrument; Old Persian tigra- sharp,
pointed; Avestan tighri- arrow; Lithuanian stingu to remain in place; Russian stegati to quilt).
Figurative sense of to remain permanently in mind is attested from c.1300. Transitive sense of to
fasten (something) in place is attested from late 13c. Stick out project is recorded from 1560s.
Slang stick around remain is from 1912; stick it as a rude item of advice is first recorded 1922.
Related: Stuck; sticking. Sticking point, beyond which one refuses to go, is from 1956; sticking-
place, where any thing put will stay is from 1570s. Modern use generally is an echo of Shakespeare.


