stink (n.)

mid-13c., strong offensive odor, from stink (v.). Sense of extensive fuss first recorded 1812.


stink-bug (n.)

1869, American English, from stink + bug (n.).


stinkpot (n.)

also stink-pot, 1660s, from stink + pot (n.1).


stink eye (n.)

dirty look, by 1972, perhaps from Hawaiian slang.


stink (v.)

Old English stincan emit a smell of any kind; exhale; rise (of dust, vapor, etc.) (class III strong
verb; past tense stanc, past participle stuncen), common West Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon stincan,
West Frisian stjonke, Old High German stinkan, Dutch stinken), from the root of stench. Old English
had swote stincan to smell sweet, but offensive sense also was in Old English and predominated by
mid-13c.; smell now tends the same way. Figurative meaning be offensive is from early 13c.; meaning
be inept is recorded from 1924. To stink to high heaven first recorded 1963.


stinkhorn (n.)

type of foul-smelling fungus, 1724, from stink + horn (n.), for its shape.


stinker (n.)

as a term of abuse (often banteringly), c.1600, agent noun from stink (v.); also in the same sense
was stinkard (c.1600). Extended form stinkeroo attested by 1934.


stinkweed (n.)

1793, from stink + weed (n.).


stinky (adj.)

1888, from stink (n.) + -y (2). Related: Stinkiness. Stinko of very poor quality is from 1924.


stinking (adj.)

late 14c., earlier stinkend, from Old English stincende; present participle adjective from stink
(v.). Modifying drunk, first attested 1887; stinking rich dates from 1956.


putrid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin putridus, from putrere to rot, from putris rotten, crumbling, related to
putere to stink, from PIE root *pu- to rot, stink (see pus). First in reference to putrid fever, an
old name for typhus (also known in Middle English as putrida). Related: Putrification.


stunk

past tense and past participle of stink (v.).


stank

Old English stanc, past tense of stink (v.).


fetid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin fetidus (commonly, but incorrectly, foetidus) stinking, from fetere have a
bad smell, stink. Perhaps connected with fimus dung, or with fumus smoke.


fling (v.)

c.1300, probably from or related to Old Norse flengja to flog, of uncertain origin. The Middle
English intransitive sense is that suggested by phrase have a fling at make a try. An obsolete word
for streetwalker, harlot was fling-stink (1670s). Related: Flung; flinging.


clench (v.)

Old English (be)clencan to hold fast, make cling, causative of clingan (see cling); compare
stench/stink. Related: Clenched; clenching.


rancor (n.)

c.1200, from Old French rancor bitterness, resentment; grief, affliction, from Late Latin rancorem
(nominative rancor) rancidness, a stinking smell (Palladius); grudge, bitterness (Hieronymus and in
Late Latin), from Latin rancere to stink (see rancid).


stench (n.)

Old English stenc a smell, odor, scent, fragrance (either pleasant or unpleasant), from Proto-
Germanic *stankwiz (cognates: Old Saxon stanc, Old High German stanch, German stank). Related to
stincan emit a smell (see stink (v.)) as drench is to drink. It tended toward bad smell in Old
English (as a verb, only with this sense), and the notion of evil smell has predominated since
c.1200.


breath (n.)

Old English br&aelig;&eth; odor, scent, stink, exhalation, vapor (Old English word for air exhaled
from the lungs was &aelig;&eth;m), from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;thaz smell, exhalation (cognates:
Old High German bradam, German Brodem breath, steam), from PIE root *gwhre- to breathe, smell.


poontang (n.)

sex with a woman; woman regarded as a sex object; female genitalia, c.1910, of uncertain origin,
probably via New Orleans Creole, from French putain prostitute, from Old French pute whore (cognate
with Spanish and Proven&ccedil;al puta), probably from fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus girl (source of
Old Italian putta girl), from Latin putus (originally pure, bright, splendid).    But also possibly
from or influenced by Old French put, from Latin putidus stinking on notion of the foulness of
harlotry [Buck], or for more literal reasons (among the 16c.-17c. slang terms for whore in English
were polecat, which might also be a pun, and fling-stink). Shortened form poon is recorded from
1969.


ambergris (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French ambre gris gray amber (see amber), a wax-like substance of ashy
colour, found floating in tropical seas, a morbid secretion from the intestines of the sperm-whale.
Used in perfumery, and formerly in cookery [OED]. Its origin was a mystery in Johnson's day, and he
records nine different theories. King Charles II's favorite dish was said to be eggs and ambergris
[Macauley, History of England]. French gris is from Frankish *gris or some other Germanic source
(cognates: Dutch grijs, Old High German gris; see gray). Praise is like ambergris; a little whiff of
it, by snatches, is very agreeable; but when a man holds a whole lump of it to his nose, it is a
stink and strikes you down. [Pope, c.1720]


feisty (adj.)

1896, aggressive, exuberant, touchy, American English, with -y (2) + feist small dog, earlier fice,
fist (American English, 1805); short for fysting curre stinking cur, attested from 1520s, from
Middle English fysten, fisten break wind (mid-15c.); related to Old English fisting stink, from
Proto-Germanic *fistiz- a fart, said to be from PIE *pezd- (see fart), but there are difficulties.
The 1811 slang dictionary defines fice as a small windy escape backwards, more obvious to the nose
than ears; frequently by old ladies charged on their lap-dogs. Compare also Danish fise to blow, to
fart, and obsolete English aske-fise, fire-tender, literally ash-blower (early 15c.), from an
unrecorded Norse source, used in Middle English for a kind of bellows, but originally a term of
reproach among northern nations for an unwarlike fellow who stayed at home in the chimney corner
[OED].


oe

found in Greek borrowings into Latin, representing Greek -oi-. Words with -oe- that came early into
English from Old French or Medieval Latin usually already had been levelled to -e- (economic, penal,
cemetery), but later borrowings directly from Latin or Greek tended to retain it at first (oestrus,
diarrhoea, amoeba) as did proper names (Oedipus, Phoebe, Phoenix) and purely technical terms.
British English tends to be more conservative with it than American, which has done away with it in
all but a few instances.    It also occurred in some native Latin words (foedus treaty, league,
foetere to stink, hence occasionally in English foetid, foederal, which was the form in the original
publications of the Federalist papers). In these it represents an ancient -oi- in Old Latin (for
example Old Latin oino, Classical Latin unus), which apparently passed through an -oe- form before
being leveled out but was preserved into Classical Latin in certain words, especially those
belonging to the realms of law (such as foedus) and religion, which, along with the vocabulary of
sailors, are the most conservative branches of any language in any time, through a need for
precision, immediate comprehension, demonstration of learning, or superstition. But in foetus it was
an unetymological spelling in Latin that was picked up in English and formed the predominant
spelling of fetus into the early 20c.


foul (adj.)

Old English ful rotten, unclean, vile, corrupt, offensive to the senses, from Proto-Germanic *fulaz
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian ful, Middle Dutch voul, Dutch vuil, Old High German f&uuml;l,
German faul, Gothic f&uuml;ls), from root *fu-, corresponding to PIE *pu-, perhaps from the sound
made in reaction to smelling something bad (compare Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih foul,
rotten; Greek puon discharge from a sore; Latin pus putrid matter, putere to stink, putridus rotten;
Lithuanian puviu to rot).  Old English ful occasionally meant ugly (as contrasted with f&aelig;ger
(adj.), modern fair (adj.)), a sense frequently found in Middle English, and the cognate in Swedish
is the usual word for ugly. Of weather, first recorded late 14c. In the sporting sense of irregular,
unfair it is first attested 1797, though foul play is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of out
of play attested by 1860. Foulmart was a Middle English word for polecat (from Old English mear&eth;
marten).


