stipulation (n.)

1550s, a commitment or activity to do something (now obsolete), from Latin stipulationem (nominative
stipulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of stipulari exact a promise, engage, bargain,
of uncertain origin. Traditionally said to be from Latin stipula stalk, straw (see stipule) in
reference to some obscure symbolic act; this is rejected by most authorities, who, however, have not
come up with a better guess. Meaning act of specifying one of the terms of a contract or agreement
is recorded from 1750. Meaning that which is stipulated or agreed upon is from 1802.


condition (n.)

early 14c., condicioun, from Old French condicion stipulation, state, behavior, social status (12c.,
Modern French condition), from Latin condicionem (nominative condicio) agreement, situation, from
condicere to speak with, talk together, from com- together (see com-) + dicere to speak (see
diction). Evolution of meaning through stipulation, condition, to situation, mode of being.


clause (n.)

c.1200, a sentence, a brief statement, a short passage, from Old French clause stipulation (in a
legal document), 12c., from Medieval Latin clausa conclusion, used in the sense of classical Latin
clausula the end, a closing, termination, also end of a sentence or a legal argument, from clausa,
fem. noun from past participle of claudere to close, to shut, to conclude (see close (v.)).
Grammatical sense is from c.1300. Legal meaning distinct condition, stipulation, or proviso is
recorded from late 14c. in English. The sense of ending seems to have fallen from the word between
Latin and French.


stipulate (v.)

1620s, bargain, make a contract (intransitive), back-formation from stipulation, or else from Latin
stipulatus, past participle of stipulari exact (a promise), bargain for. Transitive sense of demand
as a condition is from 1640s. Related: Stipulated; stipulating.


if (conj.)

Old English gif (initial g- in Old English pronounced with a sound close to Modern English -y-),
from Proto-Germanic *ja-ba (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse ef, Old Frisian gef, Old High German ibu,
German ob, Dutch of if, whether), from PIE pronomial stem *i- [Watkins]; Klein, OED suggest probably
originally from an oblique case of a noun meaning doubt (compare Old High German iba condition,
stipulation, doubt, Old Norse if doubt, hesitation, Swedish j&auml;f exception, challenge). As a
noun from 1510s.


