stock (adj.)

in reference to conversation, literature, recurring, commonplace (as in stock phrase), 1738,
figurative use from sense kept in store for constant use (1620s), from stock (n.2).


stock market (n.)

place where securities are bought and sold, 1809, from stock (n.2) + market. The original Stock
Market (mid-14c.) was a fish and meat market in the City of London on or near the later site of
Mansion House, so called perhaps because it occupied the site of a former stocks. Stock exchange is
attested from 1773.


stock (n.2)

supply for future use (early 15c.), sum of money (mid-15c.), Middle English developments of stock
(n.1), but the ultimate sense connection is uncertain. Perhaps the notion is of the trunk from which
gains are an outgrowth, or from stock (n.1) in obsolete sense of money-box (c.1400). Meaning
subscribed capital of a corporation is from 1610s.   In stock in the possession of a trader is from
1610s. Meaning broth made by boiling meat or vegetables is from 1764. Theatrical use, in reference
to a company regularly acting together at a given theater, is attested from 1761. Figurative phrase
take stock in regard as important is from 1870. As the collective term for the movable property of a
farm, it is recorded from 1510s; hence livestock.


stock (v.)

to supply (a store) with stock, 1620s, from stock (n.2). Meaning to lay up in store is from c.1700.
Earliest sense is to imprison in stocks (early 14c.). Related: Stocked; stocking.


stock-car (n.)

racing car with a basic chassis of an ordinary commercially produced vehicle, 1914, American
English, from stock (n.2) + car. Earlier a railroad car used to transport livestock (1858).


stocky (adj.)

c.1400, made of wood, from stock (n.1). Of plants, of stout and sturdy growth (not weedy) it is
recorded from 1620s. Of persons, thick-set, 1670s, suggestive of tree trunks, but compare also stock
in sense of trunk of the human body (late 14c.).


stock-holder (n.)

1753, from stock (n.2) + agent noun from hold (v.).


stockyard (n.)

also stock-yard, enclosure for sorting and keeping cattle, swine, sheep, etc., typically connected
with a railroad or slaughter-house, 1802, from stock (n.1) + yard (n.1).


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


stock-broker (n.)

1706, from stock (n.2) + broker.


stocking (n.)

close-fitting garment covering the foot and lower leg, 1580s, from stock leg covering, stocking
(late 15c.), from Old English stocu sleeve, related to Old English stocc trunk, log (see stock
(n.1)). Probably so called because of a fancied resemblance of legs to tree trunks, or a reference
to the punishing stocks. Cognates include Old Norse stuka, Old High German stuhha, from the same
Proto-Germanic source. Restriction to women's hose is 20c. As a receptacle for Christmas presents,
attested from 1853; hence stocking stuffer first recorded 1945. Stocking-feet without shoes is from
1802.


stocks (n.)

instrument of punishment and confinement formerly widely used in Europe and America (usually for
vagrants and petty offenders), early 14c., from stock (n.1), because they consisted of large wooden
blocks.


stockpile (n.)

1872, originally a term in mining, from stock (n.2) + pile (n.). Extended to general use during
World War II. The verb is attested from 1921. Related: Stockpiled; stockpiling.


Stockholm

capital city of Sweden; it arose mid-13c. from a fishing village; the second element in the name is
holm island (see holm); the first is either st&auml;k bay or stock stake, pole. Related:
Stockholmer.   Stockholm Syndrome is from 1978, a psychologists' term; the name derives from the
Aug. 23, 1973, violent armed robbery of Sveriges Kreditbank in Stockholm, after which four bank
employees were held hostage in a vault for more than five days. The hostages developed a dramatic
attachment to their abuser, and a fear of would-be rescuers, that they could not explain.


laughing-stock (n.)

also laughingstock; 1510s, formed by analogy with whipping-stock whipping post, later also object of
frequent whipping (but that word is not attested in writing in this sense until 1670s). See laughing
+ stock (n.1).


tiller (n.1)

mid-14c., stock of a crossbow, from Old French telier stock of a crossbow (c.1200), originally
weaver's beam, from Medieval Latin telarium, from Latin tela web; loom, from PIE *teks-la-, from
root *teks- to weave (see texture). Meaning bar to turn the rudder of a boat first recorded 1620s.


bourse (n.)

stock exchange, 1570s, burse, from Old French borse money bag, purse (12c.), from Medieval Latin
bursa a bag (see purse (n.)). French spelling and modern sense of exchange for merchants is first
recorded 1845, from the name of the Paris stock exchange. The term originated because in 13c. Bruges
the sign of a purse (or perhaps three purses), hung on the front of the house where merchants met.


restock (v.)

also re-stock, 1670s, from re- + stock (v.). Related: Restocked; restocking.


maulstick (n.)

light stick used by painters to support the painting hand, 1650s, from Dutch maalstok, literally
painting stick, from mallen to paint, from Proto-Germanic *mal- (cognates: Old Norse m&#230;la, Old
High German malon trace, draw, paint, German malen to paint), from mal spot, mark, stain, perhaps
from the same root as Greek melas black (see melanin), but the original sense is not color but
marking. With stock stick (see stock (n.1)).


sku (n.)

by 1974, acronym from stock-keeping unit.


NASDAQ

U.S. stock exchange, founded 1971, an acronym from National Association of Securities Dealers
Automated Quotations.


holding (n.)

early 13c., verbal noun of hold. As a football (soccer) penalty, from 1866. Meaning property held,
especially stock shares, is from 1570s.


breed (n.)

race, lineage, stock (originally of animals), 1550s, from breed (v.). Of persons, from 1590s.
Meaning kind, species is from 1580s.


summer (n.1)

hot season of the year, Old English sumor summer, from Proto-Germanic *sumur- (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Norse, Old High German sumar, Old Frisian sumur, Middle Dutch somer, Dutch zomer, German
Sommer), from PIE root *sem- (2) summer (cognates: Sanskrit sama season, half-year, Avestan hama in
summer, Armenian amarn summer, Old Irish sam, Old Welsh ham, Welsh haf summer).    As an adjective
from c.1300. Summer camp as an institution for youth is attested from 1886; summer resort is from
1823; summer school first recorded 1810; theatrical summer stock is attested from 1941 (see stock
(n.2)). Old Norse sumarsdag, first day of summer, was the Thursday that fell between April 9 and 15.


Wall Street (n.)

U.S. financial world, 1836, from street in New York City that is home to many investment firms and
stock traders, as well as NYSE. The street so called because it ran along the interior of the
defensive wall of the old Dutch colonial town.


moonraker (n.)

in England, a name traditionally given to Wiltshire people, attested from 1787, is from the stock
joke about fools who mistook the reflection of the moon in a pond for a cheese and tried to rake it
out. But as told in Wiltshire, the men were surprised trying to rake up kegs of smuggled brandy, and
put off the revenuers by acting foolish.


insider (n.)

one in possession of special information by virtue of being within some organization, 1848, from
inside + -er (1). Originally in reference to the stock markets.


had (v.)

past tense and past participle of have (q.v.). You never had it so good (1946) was said to be the
stock answer to any complaints about U.S. Army life.


slump (n.)

act of slumping, slumping movement, 1850; heavy decline in prices on the stock exchange, 1888, from
slump (v.). Generalized by 1922 to sharp decline in trade or business.


scrip (n.)

certificate of a right to receive something (especially a stock share), 1762, probably shortened
from (sub)scrip(tion) receipt. Originally receipt for a portion of a loan subscribed, meaning
certificate issued as currency first recorded 1790.


buy-in (v.)

verbal phrase, to purchase a commission or stock, 1826, from buy (v.) + in (adv.). As a noun by
1970.


thoroughbred (adj.)

1701, of persons, thoroughly accomplished, from thorough + past tense of breed. In reference to
horses, of pure breed or stock, from 1796; the noun is first recorded 1842.


pierrot (n.)

stock character in French pantomime, in English, a buffoon, from French Pierrot, diminutive of
Pierre; considered a typical name of a French peasant.


repertoire (n.)

a stock of plays, songs, etc., which a performer or company has studied and is ready to perform,
1847, from French r&eacute;pertoire, literally index, list (14c.), from Late Latin repertorium
inventory (see repertory).


genus (n.)

(plural genera), 1550s as a term of logic, kind or class of things (biological sense dates from
c.1600), from Latin genus (genitive generis) race, stock, kind; family, birth, descent, origin,
cognate with Greek genos race, kind, and gonos birth, offspring, stock, from PIE root *gene-
produce, give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to family and tribal groups (cognates:
Sanskrit janati begets, bears, janah race, janman- birth, origin, jatah born; Avestan zizanenti they
bear; Greek gignesthai to become, happen; Latin gignere to beget, gnasci to be born, genius
procreative divinity, inborn tutelary spirit, innate quality, ingenium inborn character, germen
shoot, bud, embryo, germ; Lithuanian gentis kinsmen; Gothic kuni race; Old English cennan beget,
create; Old High German kind child; Old Irish ro-genar I was born; Welsh geni to be born; Armenian
chanim I bear, I am born).


blue chip (adj.)

also blue-chip, in reference to the high-value poker counter, from 1904 in the figurative sense of
valuable; stock exchange sense, in reference to shares considered a reliable investment, is first
recorded 1929; especially of stocks that saw spectacular rises in value in the four years or so
before the Wall Street crash of that year.


growler (n.)

pitcher or other vessel for beer, 1885, American English, of uncertain origin; apparently an agent
noun from growl (v.). It owes its popularity to laws prohibiting sale of liquor on Sundays and thus
the tippler's need to stock up. Also in early use in the expression work the growler go on a spree.
Also late 19c. slang for a four-wheeled cab.


livestock (n.)

1520s, from live (adj.) + stock (n.2).


bear (n.)

Old English bera bear, from Proto-Germanic *beron, literally the brown (one) (cognates: Old Norse
bj&ouml;rn, Middle Dutch bere, Dutch beer, Old High German bero, German B&auml;r), from PIE *bher-
(3) bright, brown (see brown (adj.)).    Greek arktos and Latin ursus retain the PIE root word for
bear (*rtko; see Arctic), but it is believed to have been ritually replaced in the northern branches
because of hunters' taboo on names of wild animals (compare the Irish equivalent the good calf,
Welsh honey-pig, Lithuanian the licker, Russian medved honey-eater). Others connect the Germanic
word with Latin ferus wild, as if it meant the wild animal (par excellence) of the northern woods.
Symbolic of Russia since 1794. Used of uncouth persons since 1570s. Stock market meaning speculator
for a fall is 1709 shortening of bearskin jobber (from the proverb sell the bearskin before one has
caught the bear); i.e. one who sells stock for future delivery, expecting that meanwhile prices will
fall. Paired with bull from c.1720. Bear claw as a type of large pastry is from 1942, originally
chiefly western U.S.


ticker (n.)

1821, something that ticks, agent noun from tick (v.); slang meaning heart first recorded 1930.
Ticker tape (1891) is from ticker telegraphic device for recording stock market quotations, etc.
(1883).


Toby

familiar form of masc. proper name Tobias, in various colloquial usages, such as jug (1840),
drinking mug in the form of a stout old man; as a type of collar (1882) it refers to that worn by
the dog Toby in 19c. Punch and Judy shows. Also in Toby show (by 1942, American English) comedy act
based on the stock character of a boisterous, blundering yokel.


bullish (adj.)

1560s, from bull (n.1) + -ish; stock market sense is from 1882. Related: Bullishly; bullishness.


overstock (v.)

1640s, from over- + stock (v.). Related: Overstocked; overstocking. The noun is attested from 1710.


lame duck (n.)

1761, any disabled person or thing; especially Stock Exchange slang for defaulter.    A lame duck is
a man who cannot pay his differences, and is said to waddle off. [Thomas Love Peacock, Gryll Grange,
1861]    Sometimes also in naval use for an old, slow ship. Modern sense of public official serving
out term after an election is recorded by 1878 in American English, from an anecdote published in
that year of President Lincoln, who is alleged to have said, [A] senator or representative out of
business is a sort of lame duck. He has to be provided for.


dividend (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French dividende a number divided by another, from Latin dividendum thing to
be divided, neuter gerundive of dividere (see divide). Mathematical sense is from 1540s. Meaning
portion of interest on a loan, stock, etc. is from 1620s. Related: Dividends.


Jazz Age

1921; see jazz (n.); popularized 1922 in writings of F. Scott Fitzgerald; usually regarded as the
years between the end of World War I (1918) and the Stock Market crash of 1929.    We are living in
a jazz age of super-accentuated rhythm in all things; in a rhythm that (to jazz a word) is super-
normal, a rhythm which is the back-flare from the rhythm of a super war. [Jacobs' Band Monthly, Jan.
1921]


phylum (n.)

division of the plant or animal kingdom, 1868, Modern Latin, coined by French naturalist Georges
L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832) from Greek
phylon race, stock, related to phyle tribe, clan (see physic). The immediate source of the English
word probably is from German.


airline (n.)

also air-line, 1813, beeline, straight line between two points on the earth's surface (as through
the air, rather than over terrain; from 1853 and in later 19c. especially in reference to railways
that ran directly between big cities in the U.S. instead of meandering from town to town in search
of stock subscriptions as early railways typically did), from air (n.1) + line (n.). Meaning public
aircraft transportation company is from 1914.


NASCAR

acronym for National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, U.S. auto racing promotion group founded
1948 in Daytona Beach, Florida. NASCAR dad in U.S. political parlance, small-town, often Southern
white man who abandons traditional Democratic leanings to vote Republican at least once every four
years coined 2003 by Democratic pollster Celinda Lake.


makeshift

also make-shift, 1560s, as a noun, shifty person, rogue, from make (v.) + shift (v.). Adjectival
sense of substitute is first recorded 1680s. Compare make-sport a laughing stock (1610s).


