stoop (v.)

bend forward, Old English stupian to bow, bend, from Proto-Germanic *stup- (cognates: Middle Dutch
stupen to bow, bend, Norwegian stupa fall, drop), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat
(see steep (adj.)). Figurative sense of condescend, especially expressing a lowering of the moral
self, is from 1570s. Sense of swoop is first recorded 1570s in falconry. Related: Stooped; stooping.
The noun meaning an act of stooping is from c.1300. Stoop-shouldered attested from 1773.


stoop (n.)

raised open platform at the entrance of a house, 1755, American and Canadian, from Dutch stoep
flight of steps, doorstep, threshold, from Middle Dutch, from Proto-Germanic *stap- step (see step
(v.)).    This, unlike most of the words received [in American English] from the Dutch, has
extended, in consequence of the uniform style of building that prevails throughout the country,
beyond the bounds of New York State, as far as the backwoods of Canada. [Bartlett]     Also in South
African English as stoep.


stoup (n.)

late 14c., jug, especially one made of leather, also a measure for liquid, from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse staup cup, from Proto-Germanic *staupo- (cognates: Middle Low German stop,
Middle Dutch stoop a cup, vessel, Dutch stoop, Old High German stouf, German Stauf, Old English
steap).


duck (v.)

to plunge into (transitive), c.1300; to suddenly go under water (intransitive), mid-14c., from
presumed Old English *ducan to duck, found only in derivative duce (n.) duck (but there are cognate
words in other Germanic languages, such as Old High German tuhhan to dip, German tauchen to dive,
Old Frisian duka, Middle Dutch duken to dip, dive, Dutch duiken), from Proto-Germanic *dukjan.
Sense of bend, stoop quickly is first recorded in English 1520s. Related: Ducked; ducking. The noun
is attested from 1550s in the sense of quick stoop; meaning a plunge, dip is from 1843.


shrug (v.)

c.1400, schurgyng, of uncertain origin. Perhaps connected to Danish skrugge to stoop, crouch.
Related: Shrugged; shrugging. To shrug (something) off dismiss is recorded from 1909.


lout (n.)

1540s, awkward fellow, clown, bumpkin, perhaps from a dialectal survival of Middle English louten
(v.) bow down (c.1300), from Old English lutan bow low, from Proto-Germanic *lut- to bow, bend,
stoop (cognates: Old Norse lutr stooping, which might also be the source of the modern English
word), from PIE *leud- to lurk (cognates: Gothic luton to deceive, Old English lot deceit), also to
be small (see little). Non-Germanic cognates probably include Lithuanian liudeti to mourn; Old
Church Slavonic luditi to deceive, ludu foolish. Sense of cad is first attested 1857 in British
schoolboy slang.


cabinet (n.)

1540s, secret storehouse, treasure chamber, from Middle French cabinet small room (16c.), diminutive
of Old French cabane cabin (see cabin); perhaps influenced by (or rather, from) Italian gabbinetto,
diminutive of gabbia, from Latin cavea stall, stoop, cage, den for animals (see cave (n.)).
Meaning case for safe-keeping (of papers, liquor, etc.) is from 1540s, gradually shading to mean a
piece of furniture that does this. Sense of private room where advisors meet (c.1600) led to modern
political meaning (1640s); perhaps originally short for cabinet council (1630s); compare board (n.1)
in its evolution from place where some group meets to the word for the group that meets there.


