stout (n.)

1670s, strong beer or ale, from stout (adj.). Later especially, and now usually, porter of extra
strength (by 1762).


stout (adj.)

c.1300, proud, valiant, strong, from Old French estout brave, fierce, proud, earlier estolt strong,
from a Germanic source from West Germanic *stult- proud, stately, strutting (cognates: Middle Low
German stolt stately, proud, German stolz proud, haughty, arrogant, stately), from PIE root *stel-
to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Meaning strong in body, powerfully built is attested from late
14c., but has been displaced by the (often euphemistic) meaning thick-bodied, fat and large, bulky
in figure, which is first recorded 1804. Original sense preserved in figurative phrase stout-hearted
(1550s). Related: Stoutly; stoutness.


roly-poly (adj.)

short and stout, 1820, probably a varied reduplication of roll (v.). As a noun, it was used as the
name of various ball games from 1713, and it was used as early as 1610s in the sense of rascal. As
an appellation of a short, stout person, from 1836.


cosh (n.)

stout stick, 1869, of unknown origin.


snips (n.)

small, stout-handled shears for metal-working, 1846, from snip (v.).


Briareus

hundred-handed giant in Greek mythology, from Greek briaros strong, stout.


portly (adj.)

early 15c., stately, dignified, from port (n.3) bearing, carriage + -ly (1). Meaning stout is first
recorded 1590s.


dumpy (adj.)

short and stout, 1750, apparently from some noun dump (compare dumpling), but the connection is
unclear.


Bismarck

drink of champagne and stout (also called a black velvet), 1910, named for the German chancellor
(1815-1898), who was said to have been fond of it. The surname is said to be short for Biscofsmark
bishop's boundary.


demijohn (n.)

1769, partial translation and word-play from French damejeanne (late 17c.) Lady Jane, term used for
large globular wicker-wrapped bottle, perhaps because its shape suggested a stout woman in the
costume of the period. A general Mediterranean word, with forms found in Spanish, Portuguese,
Italian, and Arabic.


stocky (adj.)

c.1400, made of wood, from stock (n.1). Of plants, of stout and sturdy growth (not weedy) it is
recorded from 1620s. Of persons, thick-set, 1670s, suggestive of tree trunks, but compare also stock
in sense of trunk of the human body (late 14c.).


bulky (adj.)

mid-15c., plump, stout, from bulk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Bulkiness.


Toby

familiar form of masc. proper name Tobias, in various colloquial usages, such as jug (1840),
drinking mug in the form of a stout old man; as a type of collar (1882) it refers to that worn by
the dog Toby in 19c. Punch and Judy shows. Also in Toby show (by 1942, American English) comedy act
based on the stock character of a boisterous, blundering yokel.


hadrosaur (n.)

1877, from Modern Latin hadrosaurus, from Greek hadros thick, stout (see hadron) + -saurus.


carl (n.)

c.1300, bondsman; common man, man of low birth, from Old Norse karl man, male, freeman, from Proto-
Germanic *karlon-, the same root that produced Old English ceorl man of low degree (see churl).
The Mellere was a stout carle for the nones [Chaucer]


burly (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old English burlic noble, stately, literally bowerly, fit to frequent a lady's
apartment (see bower). Sense descended through stout, and sturdy by 15c. to heavily built. Another
theory connects the Old English word to Old High German burlih lofty, exalted, related to burjan to
raise, lift.


brogue (n.)

type of Celtic accent, 1705, perhaps from the meaning rough, stout shoe worn by rural Irish and
Scottish highlanders (1580s), via Gaelic or Irish, from Old Irish broce shoe, thus originally
meaning something like speech of those who call a shoe a brogue. Or perhaps it is from Old Irish
barrog a hold (on the tongue).


prunella (n.)

stout textile used for men's robes and gowns, 1650s, from French prunelle, noun use of adjective
meaning plum-colored, from prunelle, diminutive of prune plum (see prune (n.)).


corpulent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French corpulent stout, fat, from Latin corpulentus fleshy, fat, from corpus
body (see corporeal) + -ulentus full of. Leigh Hunt was sent to prison for two years for calling the
Prince Regent corpulent in print in 1812.


surmise (n.)

early 15c., legal, a charge, a formal accusation, from Old French surmise accusation, noun use of
past participle of surmettre (see surmise (v.)). Meaning inference, guess is first found in English
1580s.    Then felt I like some watcher of the skies         When a new planet swims into his ken;
Or like stout Cortez, when with eagle eyes         He stared at the Pacificâ&euro;&rdquo;and all
his men     Look'd at each other with a wild surmiseâ&euro;&rdquo;    Silent, upon a peak in
Darien.    [Keats]


plenary (adj.)

1510s, earlier plenar (mid-13c.), from Old French plenier, from Medieval Latin plenarius entire,
complete, from Latin plenus full, filled, greatly crowded; stout, pregnant; abundant, abounding;
complete, from PIE *pele- (1) to fill (see poly-). Related: Plenarily.


obese (adj.)

1650s, back-formation from obesity and in part from Latin obesus fat, stout, plump, past participle
of obedere that has eaten itself fat (see obesity). According to OED, Rare before 19th c. Related:
Obeseness. Latin obesus was translated in Old English as oferf&#230;t overfat.


valence (n.)

early 15c., extract, preparation, from Latin valentia strength, capacity, from valentem (nominative
valens) strong, stout, vigorous, powerful, present participle of valere be strong (see valiant).
Meaning relative combining capacity of an element is recorded from 1884, from German Valenz (1868),
from the Latin word. Related: Valency.


baton (n.)

1540s, a staff used as a weapon, from French b&acirc;ton stick, walking stick, staff, club, wand,
from Old French baston (12c.) stick, staff, rod, from Late Latin bastum stout staff, probably of
Gaulish origin or else from Greek *baston support, from bastazein to lift up, raise, carry. Meaning
staff carried as a symbol of office is from 1580s; musical sense of conductor's wand is from 1841
(from 1839 as a French word in English). Often anglicized 17c.-18c. as batoon.


quarterstaff (n.)

also quarter-staff, 1540s (quarter-stroke stroke with a quarterstaff is attested from early 15c.),
stout pole, six to eight feet long (six-and-a-half sometimes is given as the standard length),
tipped with iron, formerly a weapon used by the English peasantry. From staff (n.). The quarter
likely is in reference to its operation.    It was grasped by one hand in the middle, and by the
other between the middle and the end. In the attack the latter hand shifted from one quarter of the
staff to the other, giving the weapon a rapid circular motion, which brought the ends on the
adversary at unexpected points. [Century Dictionary]


spar (n.1)

early 14c., rafter; late 14c., stout pole, from or cognate with Middle Low German or Middle Dutch
sparre, from Proto-Germanic *sparron (cognates: Old English *spere spear, lance, Old Norse sperra
rafter, beam, German Sparren spar, rafter), from PIE root *sper- (1) spear, pole (see spear (n.1)).
Nautical use, in reference to one used as a mast, yard, boom, etc., dates from 1630s. Also borrowed
in Old French as esparre, which might be the direct source of the English word.


bolt (n.)

Old English bolt short, stout arrow with a heavy head; also crossbow for throwing bolts, from Proto-
Germanic *bultas (cognates: Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps from
PIE root *bheld- to knock, strike (cognates: Lithuanian beldu I knock, baldas pole for striking).
Applied since Middle English to other short metal rods (especially those with knobbed ends). From
the notion of an arrow's flight comes the lightning bolt (1530s). A bolt of canvas (c.1400) was so
called for its shape. Adverbial phrase bolt upright is from late 14c.


thumb (n.)

Old English &thorn;uma, from Proto-Germanic *thumon- (cognates: Old Frisian thuma, Old Saxon, Old
High German thumo, German Daumen, Dutch duim thumb, Old Norse &thorn;umall thumb of a glove),
literally the stout or thick (finger), from PIE *tum- swell, from root *teue- (2) to swell (see
thigh). For spelling with -b (attested from late 13c.), see limb.    To be under (someone's) thumb
be totally controlled by that person is recorded from 1580s. Thumbs up (1887) and thumbs down (1906)
were said to be from expressions of approval or the opposite in ancient amphitheaters, especially
gladiator shows, where the gesture decided whether a defeated combatant was spared or slain. But the
Roman gesture was merely one of hiding the thumb in the hand or extending it. Perhaps the modern
gesture is from the usual coachmen's way of greeting while the hands are occupied with the reins.


stow (v.)

c.1300, to put, place (somewhere), verbal use of Old English noun stow a place, spot, site, locality
(common in place names), from Proto-Germanic *stowo- (cognates: Old Frisian sto place, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch stouwen, Dutch stuwen to stow, Old High German stouwen to stop, check, German
stauen to stow, pack; bring to a halt, hem in), from PIE *stau- stout, standing, strong, extended
form of root *sta- to stand (cognates: Old Church Slavonic stavljo to place, Lithuanian stoviu to
stand; see stet). The nautical sense of put away to be stored, pack (1550s) was enforced by Dutch
stouwen to cram, pack up close. Related: Stowed; stowing.


Taurus (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin taurus bull, bullock, steer, also the name of the
constellation, from PIE *tau-ro- bull (cognates: Greek tauros, Old Church Slavonic turu bull, steer;
Lithuanian tauras aurochs; Old Prussian tauris bison); from PIE *tauro- bull, from root *(s)taeu-
stout, standing, strong (cognates: Sanskrit sthura- thick, compact, Avestan staora- big cattle,
Middle Persian stor horse, draft animal, Gothic stiur young bull, Old English steor, see steer
(n.)); extended form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Klein proposes a Semitic origin (compare
Aramaic tora ox, bull, steer, Hebrew shor, Arabic thor, Ethiopian sor). Meaning person born under
the sign of the bull is recorded from 1901.    At midnight revels when the gossips met,  He was the
theme of their eternal chat:  This ask'd what form great Jove would next devise,  And when his
godship would again Taurise?  [William Somerville, The Wife, 1727]    The Taurid meteors (peaking
Nov. 20) so called from 1878.


tight (adj.)

c.1400, tyght dense, close, compact, from Middle English thight, from Old Norse &thorn;ettr
watertight, close in texture, solid, and also from Old English -&thorn;iht (compare second element
in mete&thorn;iht stout from eating), both from Proto-Germanic *thinhta- (cognates: Middle High
German dihte dense, thick, German dicht dense, tight, Old High German gidigan, German gediegen
genuine, solid, worthy), from PIE root *tenk- (2) to become firm, curdle, thicken (cognates: Irish
techt curdled, coagulated, Lithuanian tankus close, tight, Persian tang tight, Sanskrit tanakti
draws together, contracts).    Sense of drawn, stretched is from 1570s; meaning fitting closely (as
of garments) is from 1779; that of evenly matched (of a contest, bargain, etc.) is from 1828,
American English; that of drunk is from 1830. Of persons, close, intimate, sympathetic from 1956.
From 1670s as an adverb; to sit tight is from 1738. Related: Tightly; tightness. Tight-assed
unwilling to relax is attested from 1903. Tight-laced is recorded from 1741 in both the literal and
figurative senses. Tight-lipped is first attested 1872.


great (adj.)

Old English great big, tall, thick, stout; coarse, from West Germanic *grautaz coarse, thick
(cognates: Old Saxon grot, Old Frisian grat, Dutch groot, German gro&szlig; great).    Said to have
meant originally big in size, coarse, and, if so, perhaps from PIE root *ghreu- to rub, grind. It
took over much of the sense of Middle English mickle, and is now largely superseded by big and large
except for non-material things.    As a prefix to terms denoting kinship one degree further removed
(early 15c., earliest attested use is in great uncle) it is from the similar use of French grand,
itself used as the equivalent of Latin magnus. An Old English way of saying great-grandfather was
&thorn;ridda f&aelig;der, literally third father.    In the sense of excellent, wonderful great is
attested from 1848. Great White Way Broadway in New York City is from 1901. Great Spirit high deity
of the North American Indians, 1703, originally translates Ojibwa kitchi manitou. The Great War
originally (1887) referred to the Napoleonic Wars, later (1914) to what we now call World War I (see
world).The Great War -- as, until the fall of France, the British continued to call the First World
War in order to avoid admitting to themselves that they were now again engaged in a war of the same
magnitude. [Arnold Toynbee, Experiences, 1969]  Also formerly with a verb form, Old English
greatian, Middle English greaten to become larger, increase, grow; become visibly pregnant, which
became archaic after 17c.


