stratagem (n.)

artifice, trick, late 15c., from Middle French strattegeme, stratag&egrave;me trick, especially to
outwit an enemy (15c.), from Italian stratagemma, from Latin strategema artifice, stratagem, from
Greek strategema the act of a general; military stratagem, from strategein to be a general, command,
from strategos general (see strategy). Related: Stratagematic; stratagemical. The second -a- is a
Romanic misspelling (compare Spanish estratagema).


knick-knack (n.)

also knickknack, 1570s, reduplication of knack stratagem, trick.


braid (n.)

in part from stem found in Old English gebr&#230;gd craft, fraud, gebregd commotion, Old Norse
brag&#240; deed, trick, and in part from or influenced by related braid (v.). Earliest senses are a
deceit, stratagem, trick (c.1200), sudden or quick movement (c.1300); meaning anything plaited or
entwined (especially hair) is from 1520s.


engine (n.)

c.1300, mechanical device, also skill, craft, from Old French engin skill, cleverness, also trick,
deceit, stratagem; war machine (12c.), from Latin ingenium inborn qualities, talent (see ingenious).
At first meaning a trick or device, or any machine (especially military); sense of device that
converts energy to mechanical power is 18c., especially of steam engines.


circumvent (v.)

mid-15c., to surround by hostile stratagem, from Latin circumventus, past participle of circumvenire
to get around, be around, encircle, surround, in figurative sense to oppress, assail, cheat, from
circum around (see circum-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning to go round is from 1840. Related:
Circumvented; circumventing.


jeopardy (n.)

c.1300, ioparde (13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French jeu parti, literally a divided game, game
with even chances, from jeu a game (from Latin iocus jest; see joke (n.)) + parti, past participle
of partir to divide (see part (v.)). Originally a stratagem; sense of danger, risk is late 14c.


wile (n.)

late Old English, wil stratagem, trick, sly artifice, perhaps from Old North French *wile (Old
French guile), or directly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse vel trick, craft, fraud,
vela defraud). Perhaps ultimately related to Old English wicca wizard (see Wicca). Lighter sense of
amorous or playful trick is from c.1600.


Boniface

innkeeper, from Will Boniface, character in George Farquhar's comedy The Beaux' Stratagem
(1707).Contrary to the common opinion, this name derives not from Latin bonifacius 'well-doer,' but
from bonifatius, from bonum 'good' and fatum 'fate.' The change to Bonifacius was due to
pronunciation and from this was deduced a false etymology. Bonifatius is frequent on Latin
inscriptions. Bonifacius is found only twice and these late (Thesaurus) [Dictionary of English
Surnames]


