strangle-hold (n.)

also stranglehold, 1893, in wrestling, from strangle (v.) + hold (n.). Figurative use by 1901.


strangler (n.)

1550s, agent noun from strangle (v.).


strangle (v.)

late 13c., from Old French estrangler choke, suffocate, throttle (Modern French &#233;trangler),
from Latin strangulare to choke, stifle, check, constrain, from Greek strangalan to choke, twist,
from strangale a halter, cord, lace, related to strangos twisted, from PIE root *strenk- tight,
narrow; pull tight, twist (see string (n.)). Related: Strangled; strangling.


worry (v.)

Old English wyrgan to strangle, from Proto-Germanic *wurgjan (cognates: Middle Dutch worghen, Dutch
worgen, Old High German wurgen, German w&uuml;rgen to strangle, Old Norse virgill rope), from PIE
*wergh- to turn (see wring). Related: Worried; worrier; worrying.    The oldest sense was obsolete
in English after c.1600; meaning annoy, bother, vex, first recorded 1670s, developed from that of
harass by rough or severe treatment (1550s), as of dogs or wolves attacking sheep. Meaning to cause
mental distress or trouble is attested from 1822; intransitive sense of to feel anxiety or mental
trouble is first recorded 1860.


gag (v.)

mid-15c., to choke, strangle, possibly imitative or influenced by Old Norse gaghals with head thrown
back. The sense of stop a person's mouth is first attested c.1500. Related: Gagged; gagging.


strangulation (n.)

1540s, from Latin strangulationem (nominative strangulatio) a choking, a suffocating, noun of action
from past participle stem of strangulare (see strangle). The verb strangulate (1660s) probably is a
back-formation from this. Related: Strangulated.


suffocation (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French suffocation, from Latin suffocationem (nominative suffocatio) a
choking, stifling, noun of action from past participle stem of suffocare suffocate, throttle,
stifle, strangle, originally to narrow up, from sub up (from under) (see sub-) + fauces (plural)
throat, narrow entrance (see faucet).


throttle (v.)

strangle to death, c.1400, probably from Middle English throte throat (see throat) + -le, perhaps a
frequentive suffix (as in spark/sparkle), or a utensil suffix (as in handle), or simply to
distinguish it from throat (v.), which in late 14c. was used to mean cut the throat of, kill by
cutting the throat. Related: Throttled; throttling.


quinsy (n.)

severe sore throat, late 14c., qwinaci, from Old French quinancie (Modern French esquinacie), from
Late Latin cynanche, from Greek kynankhe sore throat, also dog collar, literally dog-choking, from
kyon (genitive kynos) dog (see canine) + ankhein to strangle, cognate with Latin angere (see anger
(v.)).


smother (v.)

c.1200, to suffocate with smoke, from smother (n.), earlier smorthre dense, suffocating smoke (late
12c.), from stem of Old English smorian to suffocate, choke, strangle, stifle, cognate with Middle
Dutch smoren, German schmoren; possibly connected to smolder. Meaning to kill by suffocation in any
manner is from 1540s; sense of to extinguish a fire is from 1590s. Sense of stifle, repress is first
recorded 1570s; meaning to cover thickly (with some substance) is from 1590s. Related: Smothered;
smothering.


throat (n.)

Old English &thorn;rote (implied in &thorn;rotbolla the Adam's apple, larynx, literally throat
boll), related to &thorn;rutian to swell, from Proto-Germanic *thrut- (cognates: Old High German
drozza, German Drossel, Old Saxon strota, Middle Dutch strote, Dutch strot throat), of uncertain
origin. Italian strozza throat, strozzare to strangle are Germanic loan-words. College slang for
competitive student is 1970s, from cutthroat.


angle (n.)

space between intersecting lines, late 14c., from Old French angle angle, corner, and directly from
Latin angulus an angle, corner, a diminutive form from PIE root *ang-/*ank- to bend (cognates: Greek
ankylos bent, crooked, Latin ang(u)ere to compress in a bend, fold, strangle; Old Church Slavonic
aglu corner; Lithuanian anka loop; Sanskrit ankah hook, bent, angam limb; Old English ancleo ankle;
Old High German ango hook). Angle bracket is 1875 in carpentry; 1956 in typography.


choke (v.)

c.1300, transitive, to strangle; late 14c., to make to suffocate, of persons as well as swallowed
objects, a shortening of acheken (c.1200), from Old English aceocian to choke, suffocate (with
intensive a-), probably from root of ceoke jaw, cheek (see cheek (n.)).    Intransitive sense from
c.1400. Meaning gasp for breath is from early 15c. Figurative use from c.1400, in early use often
with reference to weeds stifling the growth of useful plants (a Biblical image). Meaning to fail in
the clutch is attested by 1976, American English. Related: Choked; choking. Choke-cherry (1785)
supposedly so called for its astringent qualities. Johnson also has choke-pear Any aspersion or
sarcasm, by which another person is put to silence. Choked up overcome with emotion and unable to
speak is attested by 1896. The baseball batting sense is by 1907.


