stratum (n.)

horizontal layer, 1590s, from Modern Latin special use of Latin stratum thing spread out, coverlet,
beadspread, horse-blanket; pavement, noun uses of neuter of stratus prostrate, prone, past
participle of sternere to spread out, lay down, stretch out, from PIE *stre-to- to stretch, extend,
from root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)).


stratification (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin stratificationem (nominative stratificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of stratificare to form strata, from stratum thing spread out  (see stratum) + root
of facere to make (see factitious). In sociology from 1879.


stratify (v.)

1660s, from French stratifier, from Modern Latin  stratificare, from stratum (see stratum). Related:
Stratified; stratifying.


stratigraphy (n.)

description of strata, 1865, from Latin strati-, comb. form of stratum (see stratum) + -graphy.
Related: Stratigraphic; stratigraphical.


strata (n.)

c.1700, plural of stratum.


strato-

before vowels strat-, word-forming element referring to layers or layering, also stratus clouds,
from comb. form of Latin stratus a spreading (see stratum).


stratus (n.)

a low layer of cloud, 1803, from Latin stratus a spreading, from noun use of past participle of
sternere (see stratum).


substratum (n.)

1630s, from Modern Latin substratum (plural substrata), noun use of neuter singular past participle
of Latin substernere to spread underneath, from sub- (see sub-) + sternere (see stratum).


consternation (n.)

1610s, from French consternation dismay, confusion, from Latin consternationem (nominative
consternatio) confusion, dismay, from consternat-, past participle stem of consternare overcome,
confuse, dismay, perplex, terrify, alarm, probably related to consternere throw down, prostrate,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + sternere to spread out (see stratum).


keep (v.)

late Old English cepan to seize, hold, also to observe, from Proto-Germanic *kopijan, but with no
certain connection to other languages. It possibly is related to Old English capian to look, from
Proto-Germanic *kap- (cepan was used c.1000 to render Latin observare), which would make the basic
sense to keep an eye on.The word prob. belongs primarily to the vulgar and non-literary stratum of
the language; but it comes up suddenly into literary use c.1000, and that in many senses, indicating
considerable previous development. [OED]Sense of preserve, maintain is from mid-14c. Meaning to
maintain in proper order is from 1550s; meaning financially support and privately control (usually
in reference to mistresses) is from 1540s. Related: Kept; keeping.


shift (n.1)

c.1300, a movement, a beginning, from shift (v.). This is the word in to make shift make efforts
(mid-15c.). Sense of change, alteration is from 1560s. Sense of means to an end is from 1520s; hence
an expedient. Meaning mechanism for changing gear in a motor vehicle is recorded from 1914.
Typewriter shift key is from 1893; shift-lock is from 1899.    Meaning period of working time
(originally in a mine) is attested from 1809, with older sense relay of horses (1708); perhaps with
sense influenced by a North Sea Germanic cognate word (such as North Frisian skeft division,
stratum, skaft one of successive parties of workmen). Similar double senses of division and relay of
workers exist in Swedish skift, German schicht.


