strew (v.)

Old English strewian, streowian to scatter, from Proto-Germanic *strawjan- (cognates: Old Frisian
strewa, Old Saxon strowian, Old Norse stra, Danish str&oslash;, Swedish str&ouml;, Middle Dutch
strowen, Dutch strooien, Old High German strouwen, German streuen, Gothic straujan to sprinkle,
strew), from PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Related: Strewed;
strewn; strewing.


strewn

past participle of strew (v.).


structure (n.)

mid-15c., action or process of building or construction; 1610s, that which is constructed, a
building or edifice; from Latin structura a fitting together, adjustment; a building, mode of
building; figuratively, arrangement, order, from structus, past participle of struere to pile, place
together, heap up; build, assemble, arrange, make by joining together, related to strues heap, from
PIE *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out.    The widespread descendants of this ancient root are
believed to include: Sanskrit strnoti strews, throws down; Avestan star- to spread out, stretch out;
Greek stronymi strew, stroma bedding, mattress, sternon breast, breastbone; Latin sternere to
stretch, extend; Old Church Slavonic stira, streti spread, strama district; Russian stroji order;
Gothic straujan, Old High German strouwen, Old English streowian to sprinkle, strew; Old English
streon strain, streaw straw, that which is scattered; Old High German stirna forehead, strala arrow,
lightning bolt; Old Irish fo-sernaim spread out, srath a wide river valley; Welsh srat plain.


litter (v.)

late 14c., provide with bedding, from litter (n.). Meaning to strew with objects is from 1713.
Transitive sense of to scatter in a disorderly way is from 1731. Related: Littered; littering.


bestrew (v.)

Old English bestreowian; see be- + strew (v.).


toss (v.)

mid-15c., to lift or throw with a sudden movement, of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian
source (compare dialectal Norwegian tossa to strew, spread). Food preparation sense (with reference
to salad, etc.) is recorded from 1723. Intransitive sense be restless; throw oneself about is from
1550s. Related: Tossed; tossing.


powder (v.)

c.1300, to put powder on; late 14c., to make into powder, from Old French poudrer to pound, crush to
powder; strew, scatter, from poudre (see powder (n.)). Related: Powdered; powdering.


prostrate (adj.)

mid-14c., lying face-down (in submission, worship, etc.), from Latin prostratus, past participle of
prosternere strew in front, throw down, from pro- forth (see pro-) + sternere to spread out, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Figurative use from 1590s.
General sense of laid out, knocked flat is from 1670s.


sprawl (v.)

Old English spreawlian move convulsively, with cognates in the Scandinavian languages (such as
Norwegian sprala, Danish spr&#230;lle) and North Frisian spraweli, probably ultimately from PIE root
*sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)). Meaning to spread out is from c.1300. That of to spread or
stretch in a careless manner is attested from 1540s; of things, from 1745. Related: Sprawled;
sprawling.


sporo-

before vowels spor-, word-forming element meaning spore, from comb. form of Greek spora a seed, a
sowing, related to sporas scattered, dispersed, sporos sowing, and speirein to sow, from PIE *spor-,
variant of root *sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).


aspersion (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin aspersionem (nominative aspersio) a sprinkling, noun of action from past
participle stem of aspergere to sprinkle on, from ad- to (see ad-) + spargere sprinkle, strew (see
sparse). Originally in theology, the shedding of Christ's blood. Modern sense of a bespattering with
slander first attested 1590s. To cast aspersions was in Fielding (1749).


spore (n.)

reproductive body in flowerless plants corresponding to the seeds of flowering ones, 1836, from
Modern Latin spora, from Greek spora a seed, a sowing, seed-time, related to sporas scattered,
dispersed, sporos a sowing, and speirein to sow, scatter, from PIE *spor-, variant of root *sper-
(4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).


spawn (v.)

c.1400, intransitive, from Anglo-French espaundre, Old French espandre to spread out, pour out,
scatter, strew, spawn (of fish) (Modern French &#233;pandre), from Latin expandere (see expand). The
notion is of a spreading out of fish eggs released in water. The transitive meaning to engender,
give rise to is attested from 1590s. Related: Spawned; spawning.


dissipate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissipatus, past participle of dissipare to spread abroad, scatter, disperse;
squander, disintegrate, from dis- apart (see dis-) + supare to throw, scatter, from PIE *swep- to
throw, sling, cast (cognates: Lithuanian supu to swing, rock, Old Church Slavonic supo to strew).
Related: Dissipated; dissipates; dissipating.


Asperges (n.)

sprinkling ritual of the Catholic church, 1550s, from Late Latin asperges, noun use of 2nd person
singular future indicative of Latin aspergere to scatter, strew upon, sprinkle, from ad to (see ad-)
+ spargere to sprinkle (see sparse). The word is taken from the phrase Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo
et mundabor, from  Psalm 51 (Vulgate), sung during the rite of sprinkling a congregation with holy
water.


sperm (n.)

male seminal fluid, late 14c., probably from Old French esperme seed, sperm (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin sperma seed, semen, from Greek sperma the seed of plants, also of animals, literally that
which is sown, from speirein to sow, scatter, from PIE *sper-mn-, from root *sper- (4) to strew (see
sprout (v.)). Sperm bank is attested from 1963. For sperm whale see spermaceti.


spread (v.)

c.1200, to stretch out, to lay out; diffuse, disseminate (transitive), also to advance over a wide
area (intransitive); probably from Old English spr&aelig;dan to spread, stretch forth, extend
(especially in tospr&aelig;dan to spread out, and gespr&aelig;dung spreading), from Proto-Germanic
*spreit- (cognates: Danish sprede, Old Swedish spreda, Middle Dutch spreiden, Old High German and
German spreiten to spread), extended form of PIE root *sper- (4) to strew (see sprout (v.)).
Reflexive sense of to be outspread is from c.1300; that of to extend, expand is attested from mid-
14c. Transitive sense of make (something) wide is from late 14c. As an adjective from 1510s.
Related: Spreading.


sprout (v.)

Old English -sprutan (in asprutan to sprout), from Proto-Germanic *sprut- (cognates: Old Saxon
sprutan, Old Frisian spruta, Middle Dutch spruten, Old High German spriozan, German sprie&#223;en to
sprout), from PIE *spreud-, extended form of root *sper- (4) to strew (cognates: Greek speirein to
scatter, spora a scattering, sowing, sperma sperm, seed, literally that which is scattered; Old
English spreawlian to sprawl, -spr&aelig;dan to spread, spreot pole; Armenian sprem scatter; Old
Lithuanian sprainas staring, opening wide one's eyes; Lettish sprie&#382;u I span, I measure).
Related: Sprouted; sprouting.


speak (v.)

Old English specan, variant of sprecan to speak, utter words; make a speech; hold discourse (with
others) (class V strong verb; past tense spr&aelig;c, past participle sprecen), from Proto-Germanic
*sprek-, *spek- (cognates: Old Saxon sprecan, Old Frisian spreka, Middle Dutch spreken, Old High
German sprehhan, German sprechen to speak, Old Norse spraki rumor, report), from PIE root *spreg-
(1) to speak, perhaps identical with PIE root *spreg- (2) to strew, on notion of speech as a
scattering of words.    The -r- began to drop out in Late West Saxon and was gone by mid-12c.,
perhaps from influence of Danish spage crackle, also used in a slang sense of speak (compare crack
(v.) in slang senses having to do with speech, such as wisecrack, cracker, all it's cracked up to
be). Elsewhere, rare variant forms without -r- are found in Middle Dutch (speken), Old High German
(spehhan), dialectal German (sp&#228;chten speak).    Not the primary word for to speak in Old
English (the Beowulf author prefers ma&thorn;elian, from m&aelig;&thorn;el assembly, council, from
root of metan to meet; compare Greek agoreuo to speak, explain, originally speak in the assembly,
from agora assembly).


straw (n.)

Old English streaw (rare) stems or stalks of certain species of grains, apparently literally that
which is scattered or strewn, related to streowian (see strew), from Proto-Germanic *strawam that
which is scattered (cognates: Old Norse stra, Danish straa, Swedish str&#229;, Old Saxon stro, Old
Frisian stre, Old Dutch, Old High German stro, Dutch stroo, German Stroh straw), from PIE *stere- to
spread (see structure (n.)). The notion perhaps is of dried grain stalks strewn on a floor as
carpeting or bedding.    As a type of what is trifling or unimportant, attested from late 13c.
Meaning hollow tube through which a drink is sucked is recorded from 1851. To draw straws as a means
of deciding something is recorded from 1779 (the custom probably is older). As an adjective, made of
straw, mid-15c.; hence false, sham. Straw poll is from 1932; earlier straw vote (1866). Straw hat
first attested mid-15c. To clutch (or grasp or catch) at straws (1748) is what a drowning man
proverbially would do. The last straw (1836 apart from the full phrase) is from the proverbial
image: it is the last straw that breaks the camel's back (or, less often, the mare's, the horse's,
or the elephant's), an image in use in English by 1755.    Let it not, however, be inferred that
taxation cannot be pushed too far : it is, as the Oriental proverb says, the last straw that
overloads the camel ; a small addition, if ill-timed, may overturn the whole. [The Scots Magazine,
April 1799]


star (n.)

Old English steorra star, from Proto-Germanic *sterron, *sternon (cognates: Old Saxon sterro, Old
Frisian stera, Dutch ster, Old High German sterro, German Stern, Old Norse stjarna, Swedish stjerna,
Danish stierne, Gothic stairno).    This is from PIE *ster- (2) star (cognates: Sanskrit star-,
Hittite shittar, Greek aster, astron, Latin stella, Breton sterenn, Welsh seren star), of uncertain
connection to other roots. Some suggest it is from a root meaning to strew, scatter. Buck and others
doubt the old suggestion that it is a borrowing from Akkadian istar venus. The source of the common
Balto-Slavic word for star (Lithuanian &#382;vaig&#382;de, Old Church Slavonic zvezda, Polish
gwiazda, Russian zvezda) is not explained.    Astrological sense of influence of planets and zodiac
on human affairs is recorded from mid-13c., hence person's fate as figured in the stars (c.1600);
star-crossed ill-fated is from Romeo and Juliet (1592). Meaning lead performer is from 1824; star
turn is from 1898. Stars as a ranking of quality for hotels, restaurants, etc. are attested from
1886, originally in Baedecker guides. Sticker stars as rewards for good students are recorded from
1970s. Brass star as a police badge is recorded from 1859 (New York City). Star-cluster is from
1870. To see stars when one is hit hard on the head is from 1839.


