strut (n.)

supporting brace, 1580s, perhaps from strut (v.), or a cognate word in Scandinavian (compare
Norwegian strut a spout, nozzle) or Low German (compare Low German strutt rigid); ultimately from
Proto-Germanic *strutoz-, from root *strut- (see strut (v.)).


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


spanking (adj.)

1660s, very big or fine, later (especially of horses) moving at a lively pace (1738), of uncertain
origin; perhaps from a Scandinavian source (OED compares Danish spanke to strut). Probably also
related to spanker something striking (for size, etc.), 1751; as a kind of sail from 1794.


swagger (v.)

1580s, to strut in a defiant or insolent manner; earliest recorded usages are in Shakespeare
(Midsummer Night's Dream, 2 Henry IV, King Lear), probably a frequentative form of swag (v.) to
sway. Meaning to boast or brag is from 1590s. Related: Swaggered; swaggering. The noun is attested
from 1725.


coquet (n.)

amorous, flirtatious person, 1690s, originally of both sexes (as it was in French), from French
coquet (17c.), diminutive of coq cock (see cock (n.1)). A figurative reference to its strut or its
lust. The distinction of fem. coquette began c.1700, and use in reference to males has faded out
since.


puncheon (n.1)

barrel or cask for soap or liquor; iron vessel, c.1400, from Old French ponchon, ponson wine vessel
(13c.), of unknown origin. Uncertain connection with puncheon slab of timber, strut, wooden beam
used as a support in building (mid-14c.). Punch (n.2) in the drink sense is too late to be the
source of the cask sense.


prance (v.)

late 14c., originally of horses, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English pranken to
show off, from Middle Dutch pronken to strut, parade (see prank); or perhaps from Danish dialectal
prandse to go in a stately manner. Klein suggests Old French paravancier. Related: Pranced;
prancing. As a noun from 1751, from the verb.


jet (v.)

early 15c., to prance, strut, swagger, from Middle French jeter to throw, thrust, from Late Latin
iectare, abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc., in place of Latin iactare toss about,
frequentative of iacere to throw, cast, from PIE root *ye- to do (cognates: Greek iemi, ienai to
send, throw; Hittite ijami I make). Meaning to sprout or spurt forth is from 1690s. Related: Jetted;
jetting.


prank (n.)

a ludicrous trick [Johnson], 1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to obsolete verb prank
decorate, dress up (mid-15c.), related to Middle Low German prank display (compare also Dutch
pronken, German prunken to make a show, to strut). The verb in the modern sense also is from 1520s.
Related: Pranked; pranking.


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


