studied (adj.)

1520s, learned; c.1600, studiously elaborate, past participle adjective from study (v.).


ebola (n.)

virus, 1976, named for Ebola River valley in Congo, where it first was studied.


naphthalene (n.)

1821, coined by English chemist John Kidd (1775-1851), who first isolated and studied it, from
naphtha + chemical suffix -ine (2) + -l- for the sake of euphony.


repertoire (n.)

a stock of plays, songs, etc., which a performer or company has studied and is ready to perform,
1847, from French r&eacute;pertoire, literally index, list (14c.), from Late Latin repertorium
inventory (see repertory).


elective (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin electivus, from electus, past participle of eligere (see election). In
reference to school subjects studied at the student's choice, first recorded 1847. As a noun, from
1701.


homework (n.)

1680s, work done at home, as opposed to work done in the shop or factory, from home (n.) + work
(n.). In sense of lessons studied at home, it is attested from 1889.


affectation (n.)

studied display, 1540s, from French affectation (16c.) or directly from Latin affectationem
(nominative affectatio) a striving after, a claiming, noun of action from past participle stem of
affectare to strive for (see affect (v.2)).


madrasah (n.)

Islamic college, 1620s, from Arabic madrasah, literally a place of study, from locative prefix ma- +
stem of darasa he read repeatedly, he studied, which is related to Hebrew darash (compare midrash).


Cambrian (adj.)

1650s, from or of Wales or the Welsh, from Cambria, variant of Cumbria, Latinized derivation of
Cymry, the name of the Welsh for themselves, from Old Celtic Combroges compatriots. Geological sense
(of rocks first studied in Wales and Cumberland) is from 1836.


mechanization (n.)

1834, from mechanize + -ation.    In our country, the ancient languages are studied, to a sad
extent, as a mere exercise in the technics of etymology, syntax and prosody; and when thus pursued,
there can be no good reason for so great a sacrifice of time and labor, or for that mechanization
(if we may make a term) of mind which is the natural result. [American Annals of Education and
Instruction, December 1834]


Ordovician (adj.)

geological period following the Cambrian and preceding the Silurian, 1879, coined by English
geologist Charles Lapworth (1842-1920) from Latin Ordovices, name of an ancient British tribe in
North Wales. The period so called because rocks from it first were studied extensively in the region
around Bala in North Wales. The tribe's name is Celtic, literally those who fight with hammers, from
Celtic base *ordo hammer + PIE *wik- to fight, conquer (see victor).


study (v.)

early 12c., to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate (translating Latin occupatur), from Old
French estudiier to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine (13c., Modern French
&eacute;tudier), from Medieval Latin studiare, from Latin studium study, application, originally
eagerness, from studere to be diligent (to be pressing forward), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push,
stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Martha swanc and becarcade to gefor&eth;igene &thorn;an
H&aelig;lende and his &thorn;eowen &thorn;a lichamlice behef&eth;en. Seo studdede emb &thorn;a
uterlice &thorn;ing. [Homily for the Feast of the Virgin Mary, c.1125]    From c.1300 as apply
oneself to the acquisition of learning, pursue a formal course of study, also read a book or
writings intently or meditatively. From mid-14c. as reflect, muse, think, ponder. Meaning regard
attentively is from 1660s. Related: Studied; studying.


