stumble (n.)

1540s, act of stumbling, from stumble (v.). Meaning a failure, false step is from 1640s.


stumble (v.)

c.1300, to trip or miss one's footing (physically or morally), probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare dialectal Norwegian stumla, Swedish stambla to stumble), probably from a variant of the
Proto-Germanic base *stam-, source of Old English stamerian to stammer, German stumm, Dutch stom
dumb, silent. Possibly influenced in form by stumpen to stumble, but the -b- may be purely
euphonious. Meaning to come (upon) by chance is attested from 1550s. Related: Stumbled; stumbling.
Stumbling-block first recorded 1526 (Tindale), used in Rom. xiv:13, where usually it translates
Greek skandalon.


stumblebum (n.)

alcoholic derelict, 1932, from stumble (v.) + bum (n.2).


peccadillo (n.)

slight sin, 1590s (earlier in corrupt form peccadilian, 1520s), from Spanish pecadillo, diminutive
of pecado a sin, from Latin peccatum a sin, fault, error, noun use of neuter past participle of
peccare to miss, mistake, make a mistake, do amiss; transgress, offend, be licentious, sin, perhaps
literally to stumble, from a PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, stumble, fall, related to the root of
foot (n.).


trip (v.)

late 14c., tread or step lightly and nimbly, skip, dance, caper, from Old French triper jump around,
dance around, strike with the feet (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch trippen to
skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample, Low German trippeln, Frisian tripje, Dutch trappen, Old English
treppan to tread, trample) related to trap (n.).    The senses of to stumble (intransitive), strike
with the foot and cause to stumble (transitive) are from mid-15c. in English. Meaning to release (a
catch, lever, etc.) is recorded from 1897; trip-wire is attested from 1868. Related: Tripped;
tripping.


jumble (v.)

1520s, originally to move confusedly, perhaps coined on model of stumble, tumble, etc. In 17c., it
was yet another euphemism for have sex with (a sense first attested 1580s). Meaning mix or confuse
is from 1540s. Related: Jumbled; jumbling.


blunder (v.)

mid-14c., to stumble about blindly, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blundra shut one's
eyes, from PIE root *bhlendh- (see blind). Meaning make a stupid mistake is first recorded 1711.
Related: Blundered; blundering.


fumble (v.)

mid-15c., handle clumsily, possibly from Old Norse falma to fumble, grope. Similar words in
Scandinavian and North Sea Germanic suggest onomatopoeia from a sound felt to indicate clumsiness
(compare bumble, stumble, and obsolete English famble, fimble of roughly the same meaning). Related:
Fumbled; fumbling.


struggle (v.)

late 14c., of uncertain origin, probably a frequentative form (compare trample, scuffle), of
uncertain origin. Skeat suggests Old Norse strugr ill will; others suggest a connection to Dutch
struikelen, German straucheln to stumble. Related: Struggled; struggling.


pejorative (adj.)

depreciative, disparaging, 1888, from French p&eacute;joratif, from Late Latin peiorat-, past
participle stem of peiorare make worse, from Latin peior worse, related to pessimus worst, pessum
downward, to the ground, from PIE *ped-yos-, comparative of root *ped- to walk, stumble, impair (see
peccadillo). As a noun from 1882. English had a verb pejorate to worsen from 1640s.


scandalize (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French scandaliser (12c.), from Church Latin scandalizare, from late Greek
skandalizein to make to stumble; tempt; give offense to (someone), from skandalon (see scandal).
Originally make a public scandal of; sense of shock by doing something improper first recorded
1640s. Dryden and Shakespeare use simple scandal as a verb. Related: Scandalized; scandalizing;
scandalization.


stagger (v.)

mid-15c., walk unsteadily, reel (intransitive), altered from stakeren (early 14c.), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Danish stagra, Old Norse stakra to push, shove, cause to reel, also
to stumble, stagger, perhaps literally hit with a stick, from Proto-Germanic *stakon- a stake, from
PIE *steg- (1) pole, stick. Cognate with Dutch staggelen to stagger, German staggeln to stammer.
Transitive sense of bewilder, amaze first recorded 1550s; that of arrange in a zig-zag pattern is
from 1856. Related: Staggered; staggering.


offend (v.)

early 14c., to sin against (someone), from Old French ofendre transgress, antagonize, and directly
from Latin offendere to hit, strike against, figuratively to stumble, commit a fault, displease,
trespass against, provoke, from ob against (see ob-) + -fendere to strike (found only in compounds;
see defend).    Meaning to violate (a law), to make a moral false step, to commit a crime is from
late 14c. Meaning to wound the feelings is from late 14c. The literal sense of to attack, assail is
attested from late 14c.; this has been lost in Modern English, but is preserved in offense and
offensive. Related: Offended; offending.


stump (v.)

early 13c., to stumble over a tree-stump or other obstacle (obsolete), from the source of stump
(n.). From 1590s as reduce to a stump. Sense of walk stiffly and clumsily is first recorded c.1600.
Sense of baffle, bring to a halt by obstacles or impediments is first recorded 1807, American
English, perhaps in reference to plowing newly cleared land, but compare earlier sense to challenge,
dare (1766).    Meaning go on a speaking tour during a political campaign is from 1838, American
English, from phrase stump speech (1820), large tree stumps being a natural perch for rural orators
(this custom is attested from 1775), especially in new settlements. Related: Stumped; stumping.


hurt (v.)

c.1200, to injure, wound (the body, feelings, reputation, etc.), also to stumble (into), bump into;
charge against, rush, crash into; knock (things) together, from Old French hurter to ram, strike,
collide, perhaps from Frankish *hurt ram (cognates: Middle High German hurten run at, collide, Old
Norse hrutr ram). The English usage is as old as the French, and perhaps there was a native Old
English *hyrtan, but it has not been recorded. Meaning to be a source of pain (of a body part) is
from 1850. To hurt (one's) feelings attested by 1779. Sense of knock died out 17c., but compare
hurtle. Other Germanic languages tend to use their form of English scathe in this sense (Danish
skade, Swedish skada, German schaden, Dutch schaden).


