stump (v.)

early 13c., to stumble over a tree-stump or other obstacle (obsolete), from the source of stump
(n.). From 1590s as reduce to a stump. Sense of walk stiffly and clumsily is first recorded c.1600.
Sense of baffle, bring to a halt by obstacles or impediments is first recorded 1807, American
English, perhaps in reference to plowing newly cleared land, but compare earlier sense to challenge,
dare (1766).    Meaning go on a speaking tour during a political campaign is from 1838, American
English, from phrase stump speech (1820), large tree stumps being a natural perch for rural orators
(this custom is attested from 1775), especially in new settlements. Related: Stumped; stumping.


stump (n.)

part of a tree trunk left in the ground after felling, mid-15c. (implied from late 13c. in
surnames); from mid-14c. as remaining part of a severed arm or leg; from or cognate with Middle Low
German stump (from adjective meaning mutilated, blunt, dull), Middle Dutch stomp stump, from Proto-
Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stumpr, Old High German stumph, German stumpf stump, German
Stummel piece cut off), from PIE *stebh- post, stem; to support  (see step (v.).


stumpy (adj.)

c.1600, from stump (n.) + -y (2). In reference to persons of stump-like figure, from 1822.


trumeau (n.)

1883, in architecture, piece of a wall between two openings, as the central pillar of a great
doorway, from French trumeau, literally calf of the leg (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare
German Trumm end, stump, Swedish dialectal tromm stump, end of a log).


chock (n.)

1670s, lumpy piece of wood, possibly from Old North French choque a block (Old French &ccedil;oche
log, 12c.; Modern French souche stump, stock, block), from Gaulish *tsukka a tree trunk, stump.


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


stunt (n.)

feat to attract attention, 1878, American English college sports slang, of uncertain origin.
Speculated to be a variant of colloquial stump dare, challenge (1871), or of German stunde,
literally hour. The movie stunt man is attested from 1930.


knub (n.)

small lump, 1560s, probably cognate with Low German knubbe knot, knob, Danish knub block, log, stump
(see knob).


runt (n.)

c.1500, old or decayed tree stump, of unknown origin. Meaning extended to small ox or cow (1540s)
and by 1610s generally to undersized animals and people. Specific American English sense of smallest
of a litter (especially of pigs) is attested from 1841. Some see a connection to Middle Dutch runt
ox, but OED thinks this unlikely, and pronounces the word of obscure origin. Related: Runty (1807).


trunnion (n.)

either of two round projections of a cannon, 1620s, from French trognon core of fruit, stump, tree
trunk, from Middle French troignon (14c.), probably from Latin truncus (see trunk).


stub (n.)

Old English stybb stump of a tree, from Proto-Germanic *stubjaz (cognates: Middle Dutch stubbe, Old
Norse stubbr), from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Extended
14c. to other short, thick, protruding things. Meaning remaining part of something partially
consumed is from 1520s.


torso (n.)

1797, from Italian torso trunk of a statue, originally stalk, stump, from Vulgar Latin *tursus, from
Latin thyrsus stalk, stem, from Greek thyrsos (see thyrsus).


snag (n.)

1570s, stump of a tree, branch, of Scandinavian origin, compare Old Norse snagi clothes peg, snaga a
kind of ax, snag-hyrndr snag-cornered, with sharp points. The ground sense seems to be a sharp
protuberance. The meaning sharp or jagged projection is first recorded 1580s; especially tree or
branch in water and partly near the surface, so as to be dangerous to navigation (1807). The
figurative meaning obstacle, impediment is from 1829.


butt (n.3)

target of a joke, 1610s, originally target for shooting practice (mid-14c.), from Old French but
aim, goal, end, target (of an arrow, etc.), 13c., which seems to be a fusion of Old French words for
end (bout) and aim, goal (but), both ultimately from Germanic. The latter is from Frankish *but
stump, stock, block, or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse butr log of wood), which would
connect it with butt (n.1).


truncheon (n.)

c.1300, shaft of a spear, also short stick, cudgel, from Old North French tronchon, Old French
tronchon (11c., Modern French tron&#231;on) a piece cut off, thick stick, stump, from Vulgar Latin
*truncionem (nominative *truncio), from Latin truncus trunk of a tree (see trunk). Meaning staff as
a symbol of office is recorded from 1570s; sense of policeman's club is recorded from 1880.


artichoke (n.)

1530s, from articiocco, Northern Italian variant of Italian arcicioffo, from Old Spanish alcarchofa,
from Arabic al-hursufa artichoke. The Northern Italian variation probably is from influence of
ciocco stump.    Folk etymology has twisted the word in English; the ending is probably influenced
by choke, and early forms of the word in English include archecokk, hortichock, artychough,
hartichoake. The plant was known in Italy by 1450s, brought to Florence from Naples in 1466, and
introduced in England in the reign of Henry VIII. French artichaut (16c.), German Artischocke (16c.)
both are also from Italian.


bun (n.)

late 14c., origin obscure, perhaps from Old French buignete a fritter, originally boil, swelling,
diminutive of buigne swelling from a blow, bump on the head, from a Germanic source (compare Middle
High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia (compare Gaelic bonnach). Spanish bu&#241;elo
a fritter apparently is from the same source. Of hair coiled at the back of the head, first attested
1894. To have a bun in the oven be pregnant is from 1951.    The first record of buns in the sense
of male buttocks is from 1960s, perhaps from a perceived similarity; but bun also meant tail of a
hare (1530s) in Scottish and northern England dialect and was transferred to human beings (and
conveniently rhymed with nun in ribald ballads). This may be an entirely different word; OED points
to Gaelic bun stump, root.


stoke (v.)

1680s, to feed and stir up a fire in a fireplace or furnace, back-formation from stoker (1650s);
ultimately from Dutch stoken to stoke, from Middle Dutch stoken to poke, thrust, related to stoc
stick, stump, from Proto-Germanic *stok- pierce, prick, from PIE *steug-, extended form of root
*(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see stick (v.)).    Meaning to stir up, rouse (feelings,
etc.) is from 1837. Stoked enthusiastic recorded in surfer slang by 1963, but the extension of the
word to persons is older, originally to eat, to feed oneself up (1882).    Having stoked up, as the
men called it, the brigades paraded at 10.30 a.m., ready for the next stage of the march. [Cassell's
History of the Boer War, 1901]


