stun (v.)

early 14c., to daze or render unconscious (from a blow, powerful emotion, etc.), probably a
shortening of Old French estoner to stun (see astonish). Related: Stunned; stunning.


stunner (n.)

1829, in pugilism, agent noun from stun. Meaning beautiful woman attested by 1848 on notion of one
who astounds or amazes.


stunning (adj.)

1660s, dazzling, present participle adjective from stun (v.). Popularized for splendid, excellent
c.1849. Related: Stunningly.


astound (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle English astouned, astoned (c.1300), past participle of astonen, astonien to
stun (see astonish), with more of the original sense of Vulgar Latin *extonare. Related: Astounded;
astounding.


stupefy (v.)

early 15c., from Latin stupefacere make stupid or senseless, benumb, stun, from stupere be stunned
(see stupid) + facere to make (see factitious).


knockout (n.)

also knock-out, in fighting, 1887, from verbal phrase knock out to stun by a blow for a 10-count in
boxing, short for to knock out of time; see knock (v.) + out. Slang meaning attractive person is
from 1892. To knock oneself out make a great effort is from 1936.


sandbag (v.)

1860, furnish with sandbags, from sandbag (n.). Meaning pretend weakness, 1970s perhaps is extended
from poker-playing sense of refrain from raising at the first opportunity in hopes of raising more
steeply later (1940), which perhaps is from sandbagger in the sense of bully or ruffian who uses a
sandbag as a weapon to knock his intended victim unconscious (1882). Hence to fell or stun with a
blow from a sandbag (1887). Related: Sandbagged; sandbagging.


astonish (v.)

c.1300, astonien, from Old French estoner to stun, daze, deafen, astound, from Vulgar Latin
*extonare, from Latin ex- out + tonare to thunder (see thunder); so, literally to leave someone
thunderstruck. The modern form (influenced by English verbs in -ish, such as distinguish, diminish)
is attested from c.1530.    No wonder is thogh that she were astoned [Chaucer, Clerk's Tale]
Related: Astonished; astonishing; astonishingly.


torpedo (n.)

1520s, electric ray (flat fish that produces an electric charge to stun prey or for defense), from
Latin torpedo electric ray, originally numbness, sluggishness (the fish so called from the effect of
being jolted by the ray's electric discharges), from torpere be numb (see torpor).    Torpedo. A
fish which while alive, if touched even with a long stick, benumbs the hand that so touches it, but
when dead is eaten safely. [Johnson]    The sense of explosive device used to blow up enemy ships is
first recorded 1776, as a floating mine; the self-propelled version is from c.1900. Related:
Torpedic.


sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


dwell (v.)

Old English dwellan to mislead, deceive, originally to make a fool of, lead astray, from Proto-
Germanic *dwelan to go or lead astray (cognates: Old Norse dv&ouml;l delay, dvali sleep; Middle
Dutch dwellen to stun, make giddy, perplex; Old High German twellen to hinder, delay; Danish dvale
trance, stupor, dvaelb&aelig;r narcotic berry, source of Middle English dwale nightshade), from PIE
*dhwel-, extended form of root *dheu- (1) dust, cloud, vapor, smoke (and related notions of
defective perception or wits).    Related to Old English gedweola error, heresy, madness. Sense
shifted in Middle English through hinder, delay, to linger (c.1200, as still in phrase to dwell
upon), to make a home (mid-13c.). Related: Dwelled; dwelt; dwells.


