muzzy (adj.)

confused, dazed, 1720s, perhaps from mossy, or from dialectal mosey (adj.) moldy, hazy; stupefied
with drink, dull, stupid.


torpid (adj.)

1610s, benumbed, without feeling or power, from Latin torpidus benumbed, stupefied, from torpere be
numb or stiff (see torpor). Figurative sense of sluggish, dull, apathetic is from 1650s. Related:
Torpidly; torpidness.


sot (n.)

late Old English sott stupid person, fool, from Old French sot, from Gallo-Roman *sott- (probably
related to Medieval Latin sottus, c.800), of uncertain origin, with cognates from Portugal to
Germany. Surviving meaning one who is stupefied with drink first recorded 1590s. As a verb, it is
attested from c.1200, but usually besot.


masturbation (n.)

1711 (earlier as mastupration, 1620s), from French masturbation and directly from Modern Latin
masturbationem (nominative masturbatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
masturbari to masturbate. The long-standing speculation is that this Latin word is altered (probably
by influence of turbare to stir up) from *manstuprare, from manu, ablative of manus hand (see
manual) + stuprare defile (oneself), from stuprum defilement, dishonor, related to stupere to be
stunned, stupefied (see stupid). But perhaps the first element represents an unattested *mazdo-
penis [OED]. An earlier technical word for this was Onanism. Related: Masturbational.


ecstasy (n.)

late 14c., extasie elation, from Old French estaise ecstasy, rapture, from Late Latin extasis, from
Greek ekstasis entrancement, astonishment, insanity; any displacement or removal from the proper
place, in New Testament a trance, from existanai displace, put out of place, also drive out of one's
mind (existanai phrenon), from ek out (see ex-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet).    Used by 17c. mystical writers for a state of rapture that stupefied
the body while the soul contemplated divine things, which probably helped the meaning shift to
exalted state of good feeling (1610s). Slang use for the drug 3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine dates
from 1985. Formerly also spelled ecstasie, extacy, extasy, etc. Attempts to coin a verb to go with
it include ecstasy (1620s), ecstatize (1650s), ecstasiate (1823), ecstasize (1830).


stop (v.)

Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian to stop up, stifle), a general West Germanic word, cognate
with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low German stoppen, Old High German stopfon,
German stopfen to plug, stop up, Old Low Frankish (be)stuppon to stop (the ears).    These words are
said by many sources to be a Germanic borrowing of Vulgar Latin *stuppare to stop or stuff with tow
or oakum (source of Italian stoppare, French &eacute;touper to stop with tow), from Latin stuppa
coarse part of flax, tow. In support of this theory, it is said that plugs made of tow were used
from ancient times in Rhine valley. Century Dictionary says this suits phonetically, but is on
grounds of meaning somewhat doubtful. Barnhart, for one, proposes the whole Germanic group might be
native, from a base *stoppon.     Sense of bring or come to a halt, discontinue (mid-15c.) is from
notion of preventing a flow by blocking a hole, and the word's development in this sense is unique
to English, though it since has been widely adopted in other languages; perhaps influenced by Latin
stupere be stunned, be stupefied. Intransitive meaning check oneself is from 1680s. Meaning make a
halt or stay, tarry is from 1711. Stop-light is from 1922; stop-sign is from 1918. Stop-motion is
from 1851, originally of looms. Related: Stopped; stopping.


