stupor (n.)

late 14c., from Latin stupor insensibility, numbness, dullness, from stupere be stunned (see
stupid).


stuporous (adj.)

1843, from stupor + -ous. Related: Stuporously; stuporousness.


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


zonk (v.)

1950, to hit hard; 1968, to put into a stupor; slang term, of echoic origin.


narco-

word-forming element meaning stupor, narcosis, sleep, from Latinized form of Greek narko-, comb.
form of narke numbness (see narcotic (n.)).


stupidity (n.)

1540s, want of intelligence, from Latin stupiditatem (nominative stupiditas) dullness, stupidity,
senselessness, from stupidus confounded, amazed; dull, foolish (see stupid). It also at various
times meant lack of feeling or emotion (1560s); stupor, numbness (c.1600).


narcotic (n.)

late 14c., from Old French narcotique (early 14c.), noun use of adjective, and directly from
Medieval Latin narcoticum, from Greek narkotikon, neuter of narkotikos making stiff or numb, from
narkotos, verbal adjective of narcoun to benumb, make unconscious, from narke numbness, deadness,
stupor, cramp (also the electric ray), perhaps from PIE root *(s)nerq- to turn, twist. Sense of any
illegal drug first recorded 1926, American English. Related: Narcotics.


narcolepsy (n.)

1880, from French narcolepsie, coined 1880 by French physician Jean-Baptiste-&Eacute;douard
G&eacute;lineau (1859-1928) from comb. form of Greek narke numbness, stupor (see narcotic) + lepsis
an attack, seizure, from leps-, future stem of lambanein take hold of, grasp (see analemma).
Related: Narcoleptic; narcolept.


carotid (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to the two great arteries of the neck, from Greek karotides great arteries of the
neck, plural of karotis, from karoun plunge into sleep or stupor, because compression of these
arteries was believed to cause unconsciousness (Galen). But if this is folk etymology, the Greek
word could be from kara head, related to kranion skull, upper part of the head, from PIE root *ker-
(1) horn, head (see horn (n.)).


ecstasy (n.)

late 14c., in a frenzy or stupor, fearful, excited, from Old French estaise ecstasy, rapture, from
Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis entrancement, astonishment; any displacement, in New
Testament a trance, from existanai displace, put out of place, also drive out of one's mind
(existanai phrenon), from ek out (see ex-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta-
to stand (see stet).    Used by 17c. mystical writers for a state of rapture that stupefied the body
while the soul contemplated divine things, which probably helped the meaning shift to exalted state
of good feeling (1610s). Slang use for the drug 3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine dates from 1985.


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


stupid (adj.)

1540s, mentally slow, lacking ordinary activity of mind, dull, inane, from Middle French stupide
(16c.) and directly from Latin stupidus amazed, confounded; dull, foolish, literally struck
senseless, from stupere be stunned, amazed, confounded, from PIE *stupe- hit, from root *(s)teu- (1)
to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). Related: Stupidly; stupidness.    Native words for
this idea include negative compounds with words for wise (Old English unwis, unsnotor, ungleaw),
also dol (see dull (adj.)), and dysig (see dizzy (adj.)). Stupid retained its association with
stupor and its overtones of stunned by surprise, grief, etc. into mid-18c. The difference between
stupid and the less opprobrious foolish roughly parallels that of German t&ouml;richt vs. dumm but
does not exist in most European languages.


dwell (v.)

Old English dwellan to mislead, deceive, originally to make a fool of, lead astray, from Proto-
Germanic *dwelan to go or lead astray (cognates: Old Norse dv&ouml;l delay, dvali sleep; Middle
Dutch dwellen to stun, make giddy, perplex; Old High German twellen to hinder, delay; Danish dvale
trance, stupor, dvaelb&aelig;r narcotic berry, source of Middle English dwale nightshade), from PIE
*dhwel-, extended form of root *dheu- (1) dust, cloud, vapor, smoke (and related notions of
defective perception or wits).    Related to Old English gedweola error, heresy, madness. Sense
shifted in Middle English through hinder, delay, to linger (c.1200, as still in phrase to dwell
upon), to make a home (mid-13c.). Related: Dwelled; dwelt; dwells.


