sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


stocky (adj.)

c.1400, made of wood, from stock (n.1). Of plants, of stout and sturdy growth (not weedy) it is
recorded from 1620s. Of persons, thick-set, 1670s, suggestive of tree trunks, but compare also stock
in sense of trunk of the human body (late 14c.).


strapping (adj.)

tall and sturdy, robust, originally applied to women, 1650s, from present participle of strap (v.).
Compare similar senses of whopping, spanking, bouncing and other present participle adjectives of
violent action expressing something large in size.


burly (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old English burlic noble, stately, literally bowerly, fit to frequent a lady's
apartment (see bower). Sense descended through stout, and sturdy by 15c. to heavily built. Another
theory connects the Old English word to Old High German burlih lofty, exalted, related to burjan to
raise, lift.


dapper (adj.)

mid-15c., elegant, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German dapper bold, strong, sturdy, later quick,
nimble, from Proto-Germanic *dapraz, perhaps with ironical shift of meaning (cognates: Old High
German tapfar heavy, German tapfer brave), from PIE root *dheb- dense, firm, compressed.


canvas (n.)

sturdy cloth made from hemp or flax, mid-14c., from Anglo-French canevaz, Old North French canevach,
Old French chanevaz, literally made of hemp, hempen, noun use of Vulgar Latin adjective *cannapaceus
made of hemp, from Latin cannabis, from Greek kannabis hemp, a Scythian or Thracian word (see
cannabis).    Latin adjectives in -aceus sometimes were made in Romanic languages into nouns of
augmentative or pejorative force. Especially as a surface for oil paintings from c.1700; hence an
oil painting (1764).


