suave (adj.)

early 15c., gracious, kindly, pleasant, delightful, from Latin suavis agreeable, sweet, pleasant (to
the senses), delightful, from PIE root *swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). In reference to
persons, sense of smoothly agreeable first recorded 1815 (implied in suavity). Related: Suavely.


smoothie (n.)

1928, suave person, person of complete self-assurance and poise, especially in the company of the
opposite sex, college slang, from smooth (adj.) + -ie. As a type of blender drink, by 1983.


suavity (n.)

c.1400, pleasantness, delightfulness; kindness, gentleness, from Latin suavitatem (nominative
suavitas) sweetness, agreeableness, from suavis (see suave). Some later senses are from French
suavit&#233;, from Old French soavite gentleness, sweetness, softness, from the Latin word.


smooth (adj.)

Old English smo&#240; smooth, serene, calm, variant of sme&#240;e free from roughness, not harsh,
polished; soft; suave; agreeable, of unknown origin and with no known cognates. Of words, looks,
pleasant, polite, sincere late 14c., but later flattering, insinuating (mid-15c.). Slang meaning
superior, classy, clever is attested from 1893. Sense of stylish is from 1922.   Smooth-bore in
reference to guns is from 1812. smooth talk (v.) is recorded from 1950. A 1599 dictionary has
smoothboots a flatterer, a faire spoken man, a cunning tongued fellow. The usual Old English form
was sme&#240;e, and there is a dialectal smeeth found in places names, such as Smithfield, Smedley.


receptionist (n.)

person hired to receive clients in an office, 1900, from reception + -ist.  Originally in
photography studios.    Let me not forget the receptionist -- generally and preferably, a woman of
refined and gentle manners, well informed and specially gifted in handling people of varied
dispositions. A woman especially who knows how to handle other women, and who can make herself
beloved by the children who may visit the studio. A woman, also, who in a thoroughly suave and
dignified way, knows just how to handle the young man of the period so that the photographer may be
glad to have his business. What a power the receptionist is when properly chosen and trained. It is
not too much to say that she can both make and destroy a business, if she has the amount of
discretionary power given to her in some galleries. [John A. Tennant, Business Methods Applied in
Photography, Wilson's Photographic Magazine, October 1900]    Earlier as an adjective in theology
and law (1867).


