subdued (adj.)

c.1600, subjugated, past participle adjective from subdue. Meaning calmed down, reduced in intensity
is recorded from 1822.


subdue (v.)

late 14c., to conquer and reduce to subjection, from Old French souduire, but this meant deceive,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, lead away, carry off; withdraw (see subduce). The primary
sense in English seems to have been taken in Anglo-French from Latin subdere and attached to this
word. Related: Subdued; subduing. As an associated noun, subdual is attested from 1670s (subduction
having acquired other senses).


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


quiet (v.)

late 14c., subdue, lessen, from quiet (adj.) and in part from Latin quietare. From mid-15c. as to
make silent, cause to be quiet; intransitive sense of become quiet, be silent is from 1791. Related:
Quieted; quieting.


subjugation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin subiugationem (nominative subiugatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin subiugare to subdue, literally bring under the yoke, from sub under (see
sub-) + iugum (see jugular).


supprise (n.)

mid-15c., injury, wrong, outrage, from supprise (v.) overpower, subdue, put down; grieve, afflict
(c.1400), also take unawares, attack unexpectedly (mid-15c.), from Anglo-French supprise, fem. past
participle of supprendre, variant of sorprendre (see surprise (n.)). The noun later also had sense
oppression; surprise attack, but perhaps originally was an alternate form of surprise used in a
specific sense.


tame (v.)

mid-14c., from tame (adj.), or altered by the form of the adjective from Old English temian subdue,
make tame, from Proto-Germanic *tamjan- (cognates: Old Norse temja, Old Frisian tema, Middle Dutch
temmen, Old High German zemmen, German z&#228;hmen, Gothic tamjan). Related: Tamed; taming.


reduce (v.)

late 14c., bring back, from Old French reducer (14c.), from Latin reducere lead back, bring back,
figuratively restore, replace, from re- back (see re-) + ducere bring, lead (see duke (n.)). Meaning
bring to an inferior condition is 1570s; that of bring to a lower rank is 1640s (military reduce to
ranks is from 1802); that of subdue by force of arms is 1610s. Sense of to lower, diminish, lessen
is from 1787. Related: Reduced; reducing.


oppress (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French opresser oppress, afflict; torment, smother (13c.), from Medieval Latin
oppressare, frequentative of Latin opprimere press against, press together, press down; figuratively
crush, put down, subdue, prosecute relentlessly (in Late Latin to rape), from ob against (see ob-) +
premere to press, push (see press (v.1)).    It is the due [external] restraint and not the
moderation of rulers that constitutes a state of liberty; as the power to oppress, though never
exercised, does a state of slavery. [St. George Tucker, View of the Constitution of the United
States, 1803]    Related: Oppressed; oppressing.


mortify (v.)

late 14c., to kill, from Old French mortefiier destroy, overwhelm, punish, from Late Latin
mortificare cause death, kill, put to death, literally make dead, from mortificus producing death,
from Latin mors (genitive mortis) death (see mortal (adj.)) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Religious sense of to subdue the flesh by abstinence and discipline first attested
early 15c. Sense of humiliate first recorded 1690s (compare mortification). Related: Mortified;
mortifying.


victor (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French, Old French victor conqueror, and directly from Latin victorem
(nominative victor) a conqueror, agent noun from past participle stem of vincere to conquer,
overcome, defeat, from PIE root *weik- (5) to fight, conquer (cognates: Lithuanian apveikiu to
subdue, overcome, Old Church Slavonic veku strength, power, age, Old Norse vigr able in battle, Old
English wigan fight, Welsh gwych brave, energetic, Old Irish fichim I fight, second element in
Celtic Ordovices those who fight with hammers). Fem. formations include victrice (late 14c.),
victress (c.1600), victrix (1650s).


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


wield (v.)

Old English weldan (Mercian), wieldan, wealdan (West Saxon) have power over, compel, tame, subdue
(class VII strong verb; past tense weold, past participle gewealden), merged with weak verb wyldan,
both from Proto-Germanic *waldan to rule (cognates: Old Saxon and Gothic waldan, Old Frisian walda
to govern, rule, Old Norse valda to rule, wield, to cause, Old High German waltan, German walten to
rule, govern).    The Germanic words and cognates in Balto-Slavic (Old Church Slavonic vlado to
rule, vlasti power, Russian vladeti to reign, rule, possess, make use of, Lithuanian veldu to rule,
possess) probably are from PIE *woldh-, extended form of root *wal- to be strong, to rule (see
valiant). Related: Wielded; wielding.


break (v.)

Old English brecan to break, shatter, burst; injure, violate, destroy, curtail; break into, rush
into; burst forth, spring out; subdue, tame (class IV strong verb; past tense br&aelig;c, past
participle brocen), from Proto-Germanic *brekan (cognates: Old Frisian breka, Dutch breken, Old High
German brehhan, German brechen, Gothic brikan), from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Most
modern senses were in Old English. In reference to the heart from early 13c. Meaning to disclose is
from early 13c.   Break bread share food (with) is from late 14c. Break the ice is c.1600, in
reference to the coldness of encounters of strangers. Break wind first attested 1550s. To break
(something) out (1890s) probably is an image from dock work, of freeing cargo before unloading it.
Ironic theatrical good luck formula break a leg has parallels in German Hals- und Beinbruch break
your neck and leg, and Italian in bocca al lupo. Evidence of a highly superstitious craft (see
Macbeth).


