sublime (adj.)

1580s, expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner, from Middle French sublime (15c.), or directly
from Latin sublimis uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished, possibly
originally sloping up to the lintel, from sub up to + limen lintel, threshold, sill (see limit
(n.)). The sublime (n.) the sublime part of anything, that which is stately or imposing is from
1670s. For Sublime Porte, former title of the Ottoman government, see Porte.


unearthly (adj.)

1610s, heavenly, sublime, from un- (1) not + earthly. Sense of ghostly, weird first recorded 1802.
Related: Unearthliness.


bathos (n.)

anticlimax, a descent from the sublime to the ridiculous, 1727, from Greek bathos depth, related to
bathys deep (see benthos). Introduced by Pope.


mikado (n.)

1727, former title of the emperor of Japan, from mi honorable + kado gate, portal. Similar to
Sublime Porte, old title of the Ottoman emperor/government, and Pharaoh, which literally means great
house.


sublimity (n.)

early 15c., loftiness, exaltation, worthiness, nobility, glory, from Latin sublimitatem (nominative
sublimitas) loftiness, exaltation, from sublimis (see sublime).


sublimation (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, process of purifying by vaporizing then allowing to cool, from Medieval Latin
sublimationem (nominative sublimatio) refinement, literally a lifting up, deliverance, noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin sublimare to raise, elevate, from sublimis lofty, high,
exalted; eminent, distinguished (see sublime).


Porte (n.)

Ottoman court at Constantinople, c.1600, from French, in full, la Sublime Porte, literally the high
gate, translation of Arabic al-Bab al-'Ali, lofty gate, official name of the central office of the
Ottoman government (compare Vatican for the Papacy, White House for the United States). Compare also
mikado. Supposedly a reference to the ancient custom of holding royal audience in the doorway of a
king's palace or tent.


subliminal (adj.)

1873, below the threshold (of consciousness or sensation), formed from Latin stem of sublime (Latin
limen, genitive liminis) + -al (1)). Apparently a loan-translation of German unter der Schwelle (des
Bewusstseins) beneath the threshold (of consciousness), from Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776-1841),
author of a textbook on psychology published in 1824. The scare over subliminal advertising came in
1957. Related: Subliminally.


Bhagavad-Gita (n.)

dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna inserted in Mahabharata, from Sanskrit, Song of the Sublime One,
from Bhaga, a god of wealth, from Sanskrit bhagah, literally allotter, distributor, master, lord,
from bhajati assigns, allots, apportions, enjoys, loves (related to Avestan baga, Old Persian baga
master, lord, god) + gita song, fem. past participle of gayate sings, calls, from PIE root *gei- to
sing (cognates: Avestan gatha song, Lithuanian giedoti to sing).


polka (n.)

1844, from French polka, German Polka, probably from Czech polka, the dance, literally Polish woman
(Polish Polka), fem. of Polak a Pole. The word might also be an alteration of Czech pulka half, for
the half-steps of Bohemian peasant dances. Or it could be a merger of the two. The dance was in
vogue first in Prague, 1835; it reached London by the spring of 1842.   Vous n'en &#234;tes encore
qu'au galop, vieil arri&#233;r&#233;, et nous en sommes &#224; la polka! Oui, c'est la polka que
nous avons dans&#233;e &#224; ce fameux bal Valenlino. Vous demandez ce que c'est que la polka,
homme de l ann&#233;e derni&#232;re! La contredanse a v&#233;cu; le galop, rococo; la valse &#224;
deux temps, dans le troisi&#232;me dessous; il n'y a plus que la polka, la sublime, l'enivrante
polka, dont les salons raffolent, que les femmes de la haute, les banqui&#233;res les plus cossues
et les comtesses les plus choenosophoses &#233;tudient jour et nuit. [La France Dramatique, Paris,
1841]    As a verb by 1846 (polk also was tried).


grand (adj.)

late 14c., grant large, big (early 12c. in surnames), from Anglo-French graunt and directly from Old
French grant, grand (10c.) large, tall; grown-up; great, powerful, important; strict, severe;
extensive; numerous, from Latin grandis big, great; full, abundant, also full-grown; figuratively
strong, powerful, weighty, severe (perhaps cognate with Greek brenthyomai to swagger, be haughty).
It supplanted magnus in Romanic languages; in English with a special sense of imposing. The
connotations of noble, sublime, lofty, dignified, etc., were in Latin. As a general term of
admiration, magnificent, splendid, from 1816. Related: Grander; grandest.    The use of grand- in
compounds, with the sense of a generation older than, or younger than, is first attested c.1200, in
Anglo-French graund dame grandmother. Latin and Greek had similar usages.   Grand jury is late 15c.
Grand piano from 1797. The grand tour of the principal sites of continental Europe, as part of a
gentleman's education, is attested by that name from 1660s. The Grand Canyon was so called 1871 by
Maj. John Wesley Powell, scientific adventurer, who explored it; earlier it had been known as Big
Canyon.


