submerge (v.)

c.1600 (transitive), from French submerger (14c.) or directly from Latin submergere to plunge under,
sink, overwhelm, from sub under (see sub-) + mergere to plunge, immerse (see merge). Intransitive
meaning sink under water, sink out of sight is from 1650s, made common 20c. in connection with
submarines. Related: Submerged; submerging.


submerse (v.)

early 15c., to submerge, plunge (transitive), from Latin submersus, past participle of submergere
(see submerge). Modern use (18c.) might be a back-formation from submersion. Related: Submersed;
submersing.


drench (v.)

c.1200, to submerge, drown, from Old English drencan give drink to, ply with drink, make drunk;
soak, saturate; submerge, drown, causative of drincan to drink (see drink), from Proto-Germanic
*drankijan (cognates: Old Norse drekkja, Swedish dr&auml;nka, Dutch drenken, German tr&auml;nken,
Gothic dragkjan to give to drink). Sense of to wet thoroughly by throwing liquid over is from
c.1550. Related: Drenched; drenching.


submersion (n.)

early 15c., suffocation by being plunged into water, from Late Latin submersionem (nominative
submersio) a sinking, submerging, noun of action from past participle stem of submergere to sink
(see submerge). General sense from early 17c.


founder (v.)

early 14c., from Old French fondrer collapse; submerge, sink, fall to the bottom, from fond bottom,
from Latin fundus bottom, foundation (see fund (n.)). Related: Foundered; foundering.


submersible (adj.)

1862, from submerse or from Latin submers-, past participle stem of submergere + -ible. As a noun,
from 1900, a submersible craft. Alternative adjective submergible is attested from 1820, from
submerge.


overwhelm (v.)

early 14c., to turn upside down, to overthrow, from over- + Middle English whelmen to turn upside
down (see whelm). Meaning to submerge completely is mid-15c. Perhaps the connecting notion is a
boat, etc., washed over, and overset, by a big wave. Figurative sense of to bring to ruin is
attested from 1520s. Related: Overwhelmed; overwhelming; overwhelmingly.


dive (v.)

mid-13c., from Old English dufan to dive, duck, sink (intransitive, class II strong verb; past tense
deaf, past participle dofen) and dyfan to dip, submerge (weak, transitive), from Proto-Germanic verb
*dubijan, from PIE *dheub- deep, hollow (see deep (adj.)). Past tense dove is a later formation,
perhaps on analogy of drive/drove. Related: Diving. Dive bomber attested by 1939.


