submissive (adj.)

1580s, inclined to submit, yielding to authority, from Latin submiss-, past participle stem of
submittere (see submission) + -ive. Masochistic sexual sense is attested by 1969. As a noun in this
sense, by 1985. Related: Submissively; submissiveness.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


resigned (adj.)

submissive, full of resignation, 1690s, past participle adjective from resign (v.). Related:
Resignedly.


subordination (n.)

mid-15c., subordinacioun hierarchical arrangement, from Medieval Latin subordinationem (nominative
subordinatio), noun of action from past participle stem of subordinare (see subordinate (adj.)).
Meaning condition of being duly submissive is from 1736.


uxorious (adj.)

excessively fond of or submissive to one's wife, 1590s, from Latin uxorius of or pertaining to a
wife, also devoted to a wife or ruled by a wife, from uxor (genitive uxoris) wife, according to
Watkins from PIE *uk-sor- 'she who gets accustomed (to a new household)' after patrilocal marriage.


docile (adj.)

late 15c., easily taught, from Italian or French docile, from Latin docilis easily taught, from
docere teach (see doctor). Sense of obedient, submissive first recorded 1774.


masochism (n.)

sexual pleasure in being hurt or abused, 1892, from German Masochismus, coined 1883 by German
neurologist Richard von Krafft-Ebing (1840-1902), from name of Leopold von Sacher-Masoch
(1836-1895), Austrian utopian socialist novelist who enshrined his submissive sexuality in Venus in
Furs (1869, German title Venus im Pelz).


truckle (v.)

give up or submit tamely, 1610s, originally sleep in a truckle bed (see truckle (n.)). Meaning give
precedence, assume a submissive position (1650s, implied in truckling) is perhaps in reference to
that type of bed being used by servants and inferiors or simply occupying the lower position.
Related: Truckled; truckling.


subject (v.)

late 14c., to make (a person or nation) subject to another by force, also to render submissive or
dependent, from Medieval Latin subiectare place beneath, frequentative of Latin subicere to make
subject, subordinate (see subject (n.)). Meaning to lay open or expose to (some force or occurrence)
is recorded from early 15c. (implied in subjected). Related: Subjecting.


subjective (adj.)

c.1500, characteristic of one who is submissive or obedient, from Late Latin subiectivus of the
subject, subjective, from subiectus lying under, below, near bordering on, figuratively subjected,
subdued(see subject (n.)). In early Modern English as existing, real; more restricted meaning
existing in the mind (the mind as the thinking subject) is from 1707, popularized by Kant and his
contemporaries; thus, in art and literature, personal, idiosyncratic (1767). Related: Subjectively;
subjectiveness.


meek (adj.)

c.1200, gentle, quiet, unaggressive; benevolent, kind; courteous, humble, unassuming; of a woman,
modest, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mjukr soft, pliant, gentle, from Proto-Germanic
*meukaz (cognates: Gothic muka-modei humility, Dutch muik soft), of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE *meug- slippery, slimy. In the Bible, it translates Latin mansuetus from Vulgate (see
mansuetude). Sense of submissive is from mid-14c.


submission (n.)

late 14c., act of referring to a third party for judgment or decision, from Old French submission or
directly from Latin submissionem (nominative submissio) a lowering, letting down; sinking, noun of
action from past participle stem of submittere to let down, put down, lower, reduce, yield (see
submit).    Sense of humble obedience is first recorded mid-15c. Modern French submission has been
replaced by doublet soumission. English in 16c.-17c. also had an adjective submiss humble,
submissive.  Submissionist in various political historical contexts is from 1828.


