subordinate (n.)

one inferior in power, rank, office, etc., 1630s, from subordinate (adj.).


subordinate (v.)

to bring into a subordinate position to something else, to make of less value, to make auxiliary or
dependent, 1590s, from Medieval Latin subordinatus (see subordinate (adj.)). Related: Subordinated;
subordinating.


subordinate (adj.)

mid-15c., having an inferior rank, from Medieval Latin subordinatus placed in a lower order, made
subject, past participle of subordinare place in a lower order, from Latin sub under (see sub-) +
ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain). Related: Subordinance; subordinant; subordinately. For
of or pertaining to the classificatory rank of a suborder, subordinal (1842) is used.


dependencies (n.)

territories subordinate to another nation, 1680s; see dependency.


subhead (n.)

smaller heading or title in a book, chapter, newspaper, etc., 1875, from sub- + head (n.) in the
sense of heading, headline. Meaning subordinate section of a subject is from 1670s.


servient (adj.)

1640s, from Latin servientem subordinate, present participle of servire be a servant, be a slave
(see serve (v.)).


superordinate (adj.)

1610s, on model of subordinate with super-. Related: Superordination.


accessory (adj.)

1550s, subordinate, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from accedere (see access
(n.)). Meaning aiding in crime is from c.1600.


dependency

1590s (adj.), 1610s (n.); see dependent + -cy. Originally also dependancy, on the French model, but
the Latinate form gradually pushed this into disuse; see -ance. Meaning territory subordinate to
another nation is recorded from 1680s.


underclass (n.)

subordinate social class, 1894, from under (adj.) + class (n.). A loan-translation of Swedish
underklass.


subset (n.)

also sub-set, subordinate set, 1897, originally in mathematics, from sub- + set (n.1).


insubordinate (adj.)

1849, on model of French insubordonn&eacute; (1789); from in- (1) not, opposite of + subordinate.
Related: Insubordinately.


subordination (n.)

mid-15c., subordinacioun hierarchical arrangement, from Medieval Latin subordinationem (nominative
subordinatio), noun of action from past participle stem of subordinare (see subordinate (adj.)).
Meaning condition of being duly submissive is from 1736.


because (conj.)

c.1300, bi cause by cause, modeled on French par cause. Originally a phrase, often followed by a
subordinate clause introduced by that or why. One word from c.1400. As an adverb from late 14c.
Clipped form cause attested in writing by mid-15c.


subtitle (n.)

also sub-title, 1825, subordinate or additional title, usually explanatory, in reference to literary
works, from sub- under + title (n.). Applied to motion pictures by 1908. As a verb from 1858.
Related: Subtitled.


quartermaster (n.)

early 15c., subordinate officer of a ship, from French quartier-ma&icirc;tre or directly from Dutch
kwartier-meester; originally a ship's officer whose duties included stowing of the hold; later
(c.1600) an officer in charge of quarters and rations for troops. See quarters.


accessory (n.)

also accessary, early 15c. as a legal term in the criminal sense of one aiding in a crime; also that
which is subordinate to something else, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from
accedere (see access (n.)). Attested from 1896 as woman's smaller articles of dress, hence
accessorize.


praetor (n.)

elected magistrate in ancient Rome (subordinate to consuls), early 15c., from Latin praetor one who
goes before; originally a consul as leader of an army, from prae before (see pre-) + root of ire to
go (see ion).


demiurge (n.)

1670s, from Latinized form of Greek demiourgos, literally public or skilled worker (from demos
common people; see demotic + ergos work; see organ).    The title of a magistrate in some
Peloponnesian city-states and the Ach&aelig;an League; taken in Platonic philosophy as a name for
the maker of the world. In the Gnostic system, conceived as a being subordinate to the Supreme
Being, and sometimes as the author of evil [OED].


out-building (n.)

a detached or subordinate building, 1620s, from out + building (n.).


underlie (v.)

Old English under licgan to be subordinate to, to submit to; see under + lie (v.2). Meaning to lie
under or beneath is attested from c.1600; figurative sense of to be the basis of is attested from
1852 (implied in underlying). Similar formation in Old High German untarliggan; German unterliegen.


subject (v.)

late 14c., to make (a person or nation) subject to another by force, also to render submissive or
dependent, from Medieval Latin subiectare place beneath, frequentative of Latin subicere to make
subject, subordinate (see subject (n.)). Meaning to lay open or expose to (some force or occurrence)
is recorded from early 15c. (implied in subjected). Related: Subjecting.


subaltern (n.)

junior military officer, 1680s, earlier more generally, person of inferior rank (c.1600), noun use
of adjective subaltern having an inferior position, subordinate (1580s), from Middle French
subalterne, from Late Latin subalternus, from Latin sub under (see sub-) + alternus every other
(one), one after the other (see alternate (adj.)).


ancillary (adj.)

1660s, subservient, subordinate, from Latin ancillaris relating to maidservants, diminutive of
ancilla handmaid, fem. diminutive of anculus servant, literally he who bustles about, from root of
ambi- about (see ambi-) + PIE *kwol-o-, from root *kwel- (1) move round, turn about, be much about
(see cycle (n.)).


vassal (n.)

early 14c. (c.1200 as a surname) tenant who pledges fealty to a lord, from Old French vassal
subject, subordinate, servant (12c.), from Medieval Latin vassallus manservant, domestic, retainer,
extended from vassus servant, from Old Celtic *wasso- young man, squire (cognates: Welsh gwas youth,
servant, Breton goaz servant, vassal, man, Irish foss servant). The adjective is recorded from
1580s.


annex (v.)

late 14c., to connect with, from Old French annexer to join (13c.), from Medieval Latin annexare,
frequentative of Latin annecetere to bind to, from ad- to (see ad-) + nectere to tie, bind (see
nexus). Almost always meaning to join in a subordinate capacity. Of nations or territories, c.1400.
Related: Annexed; annexing.


suppose (v.)

early 14c., to assume as the basis of argument, from Old French suposer to assume (13c.), probably a
replacement (influenced by Old French poser put, place) of *suppondre, from Latin supponere put or
place under; to subordinate, make subject, from sub under (see sub-) + ponere put, place (see
position). Meaning to admit as possible, to believe to be true is from 1520s.


tetrarch (n.)

late Old English tetrarche ruler of one of four divisions of a kingdom or province, from Late Latin
tetrarcha, from tetrarches, from Greek tetrarkhes leader of four companies, ruler of four provinces,
from tetra- four (see tetra-) + arkhein to rule (see archon). Applied generally to subordinate
rulers in the Roman Empire, especially in Syria. Related: Tetrarchy.


governor (n.)

c.1300, gouernour, personal keeper, protector, guide, from Old French governeor (11c., Modern French
gouverneur) and directly from Latin gubernatorem (nominative gubernator) director, ruler, governor,
originally steersman, pilot (see govern). Meaning subordinate ruler; head of a province, etc. is
from late 14c. The adjective gubernatorial remembers the Latin form.


substitution (n.)

late 14c., appointment of a subordinate or successor, from Middle French substitution or directly
from Late Latin substitutionem (nominative substitutio) a putting in place of (another), noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin substituere put in place of another, place under or next
to, present, submit, from sub under (see sub-) + statuere set up, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with
derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet).


second (adj.)

next after first, c.1300, from Old French second, secont, and directly from Latin secundus
following, next in time or order, also secondary, subordinate, inferior, from root of sequi follow
(see sequel). Replaced native other in this sense because of the ambiguousness of the earlier word.
Second sight is from 1610s; an etymologically perverse term, because it means in reality the sight
of events before, not after, they occur. Second fiddle first attested 1809:    A metaphor borrowed
from a musical performer who plays the second or counter to one who plays the first or the air.
[Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


minister (n.)

c.1300, one who acts upon the authority of another, from Old French menistre servant, valet, member
of a household staff, administrator, musician, minstrel (12c.), from Latin minister (genitive
ministri) inferior, servant, priest's assistant (in Medieval Latin, priest), from minus, minor less,
hence subordinate, (see minus) + comparative suffix *-teros. Formed on model of magister. Meaning
priest is attested in English from early 14c. Political sense of high officer of the state is
attested from 1620s, from notion of service to the crown.


subjunctive (n.)

mood employed to denote an action or state as conceived and not as a fact, 1620s, from earlier
adjectival use of subjunctive (1520s), from Late Latin subiunctivus serving to join, connecting,
from subiunct-, past participle stem of Latin subiungere to append, add at the end, place under,
from sub under (see sub-) + iungere to join (see jugular). The Latin modus subiunctivus probably is
a grammarians' loan-translation of Greek hypotaktike enklisis subordinated, so called because the
Greek subjunctive mood is used almost exclusively in subordinate clauses.


candle (n.)

Old English candel lamp, lantern, candle, an early ecclesiastical borrowing from Latin candela a
light, torch, candle made of tallow or wax, from candere to shine, from PIE root *kand- to glow, to
shine, to shoot out light (cognates: Sanskrit cand- to give light, shine, candra- shining, glowing,
moon; Greek kandaros coal; Welsh cann white; Middle Irish condud fuel).    Candles were unknown in
ancient Greece (where oil lamps sufficed), but common from early times among Romans and Etruscans.
Candles on birthday cakes seems to have been originally a German custom. To hold a candle to
originally meant to help in a subordinate capacity, from the notion of an assistant or apprentice
holding a candle for light while the master works (compare Old English taporberend acolyte). To burn
the candle at both ends is recorded from 1730.


sub-

word-forming element meaning under, beneath; behind; from under; resulting from further division,
from Latin preposition sub under, below, beneath, at the foot of, also close to, up to, towards; of
time, within, during; figuratively subject to, in the power of; also a little, somewhat (as in sub-
horridus somewhat rough).    This is said to be from PIE *(s)up- (perhaps representing *ex-upo-), a
variant form of the root *upo- from below, hence turning upward, upward, up, up from under, over,
beyond (cognates: Sanskrit upa near, under, up to, on, Greek hypo under, Gothic iup, Old Norse, Old
English upp up, upward, Hittite up-zi rises). The Latin word also was used as a prefix and in
various combinations.    In Latin assimilated to following -c-, -f-, -g-, -p-, and often -r- and
-m-. In Old French the prefix appears in the full Latin form only in learned adoptions of old Latin
compounds [OED], and in popular use it was represented by sous-, sou-; as in French souvenir from
Latin subvenire, souscrire (Old French souzescrire) from subscribere, etc.    The original meaning
is now obscured in many words from Latin (suggest, suspect, subject, etc.). The prefix is active in
Modern English, sometimes meaning subordinate (as in subcontractor); inferior (17c., as in
subhuman); smaller (18c.); a part or division of (c.1800, as in subcontinent).


subject (n.)

early 14c., person under control or dominion of another, specifically a government or ruler, from
Old French sogit, suget, subget a subject person or thing (12c., Modern French sujet), from noun use
of Latin subiectus lying under, below, near bordering on, figuratively subjected, subdued, past
participle of subicere, subiicere to place under, throw under, bind under; to make subject,
subordinate, from sub under (see sub-) + combining form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). In 14c.,
sugges, sogetis, subgit, sugette; form re-Latinized in English 16c.    Meaning person or thing
regarded as recipient of action, one that may be acted upon is recorded from 1590s. Grammatical
sense is recorded from 1630s, from Latin subjectum grammatical subject, noun use of the neuter of
the Latin past participle. Likewise some restricted uses in logic and philosophy are borrowed
directly from Latin subjectum as foundation or subject of a proposition, a loan-translation of
Aristotle's to hypokeimenon. Meaning subject matter of an art or science is attested from 1540s,
probably short for subject matter (late 14c.), which is from Medieval Latin subjecta materia, a loan
translation of Greek hypokeimene hyle (Aristotle), literally that which lies beneath.


cell (n.)

early 12c., small monastery, subordinate monastery (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later small
room for a monk or a nun in a monastic establishment; a hermit's dwelling (c.1300), from Latin cella
small room, store room, hut, related to Latin celare to hide, conceal.    The Latin word represents
PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (cognates: Sanskrit cala hut, house, hall; Greek kalia hut,
nest, kalyptein to cover, koleon sheath, kelyphos shell, husk; Latin clam secret; Old Irish cuile
cellar, celim hide, Middle Irish cul defense, shelter; Gothic hulistr covering, Old English heolstor
lurking-hole, cave, covering, Gothic huljan cover over, hulundi hole, hilms helmet, halja hell, Old
English hol cave, holu husk, pod).    Sense of monastic rooms extended to prison rooms (1722). Used
in 14c., figuratively, of brain compartments; used in biology by 17c. of various cavities (wood
structure, segments of fruit, bee combs), gradually focusing to the modern sense of basic structure
of living organisms (which OED dates to 1845).    Electric battery sense is from 1828, based on
original form. Meaning small group of people working within a larger organization is from 1925. Cell
body is from 1851; cell division from 1846; cell membrane from 1837 (but cellular membrane is 1732);
cell wall from 1842.


