substantial (adj.)

mid-14c., ample, sizeable, from Old French substantiel (13c.) and directly from Latin substantialis
having substance or reality, material, in Late Latin pertaining to the substance or essence, from
substantia being, essence, material(see substance). Meaning existing, having real existence is from
late 14c. Meaning involving an essential part or point is early 15c. Related: Substantially.


piece de resistance (n.)

1831, from French pi&egrave;ce de r&eacute;sistance, originally the most substantial dish in a meal.
Lit. piece of resistance; there seems to be disagreement as to the exact signification.


unsubstantial (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + substantial (adj.).


insubstantial (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin insubstantialis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + substantialis (see
substantial). Related: Insubstantially.


reasonable (adj.)

c.1300, having sound judgment, sane, rational, from Old French raisonable, from Latin rationabilis,
from ratio (see reason (n.)).What the majority of people consider to be 'reasonable' is that about
which there is agreement, if not among all, at least among a substantial number of people;
'reasonable' for most people, has nothing to do with reason, but with consensus. [Erich Fromm, The
Heart of Man, 1968]Meaning moderate in price is recorded from 1660s. Related: Reasonably.


material (adj.)

mid-14c., real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world; a term in scholastic philosophy
and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis
(adj.) of or belonging to matter, from Latin materia matter, stuff, wood, timber (see matter). From
late 14c. as made of matter, having material existence; material, physical, substantial; from late
15c. as important, relevant.


tenuous (adj.)

1590s, thin, unsubstantial, irregularly formed from Latin tenuis thin, drawn out, meager, slim,
slender, figuratively trifling, insignificant, poor, low in rank, from PIE root *ten- to stretch
(cognates: Sanskrit tanuh thin, literally stretched out; see tenet) + -ous. The correct form with
respect to the Latin is tenuious. The figurative sense of having slight importance, not substantial
is found from 1817 in English. Related: Tenuously; tenuousness.


supper (n.)

mid-13c., soper, the last meal of the day, from Old French soper evening meal, noun use of
infinitive soper to eat the evening meal, which is of Germanic origin (see sup (v.1)).    Formerly,
the last of the three meals of the day (breakfast, dinner, and supper); now applied to the last
substantial meal of the day when dinner is taken in the middle of the day, or to a late meal
following an early evening dinner. Supper is usually a less formal meal than late dinner. [OED]
Applied since c.1300 to the last meal of Christ.


staunch (adj.)

early 15c., impervious to water, from Old French estanche firm, watertight, fem. of estanc tired,
exhausted, wearied, vanquished; water-tight; withered, dried (Modern French &#233;tanche), from
Vulgar Latin *stanticare (source also of Spanish estanco water-tight, Italian stanco exhausted,
weary), probably from Latin stans (genitive stantis), present participle of stare to stand, from PIE
root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of strong, substantial first recorded mid-15c.; of persons,
standing firm and true to one's principles from 1620s.


soul (n.1)

A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks and wills
[Century Dictionary], Old English sawol spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence;
life, living being, from Proto-Germanic *saiwalo (cognates: Old Saxon seola, Old Norse sala, Old
Frisian sele, Middle Dutch siele, Dutch ziel, Old High German seula, German Seele, Gothic saiwala),
of uncertain origin.    Sometimes said to mean originally coming from or belonging to the sea,
because that was supposed to be the stopping place of the soul before birth or after death
[Barnhart]; if so, it would be from Proto-Germanic *saiwaz (see sea). Klein explains this as from
the lake, as a dwelling-place of souls in ancient northern Europe.    Meaning spirit of a deceased
person is attested in Old English from 971. As a synonym for person, individual, human being (as in
every living soul) it dates from early 14c. Soul-searching (n.) is attested from 1871, from the
phrase used as a past participle adjective (1610s). Distinguishing soul from spirit is a matter best
left to theologians.


