subsequent (adj.)

following in time, later, mid-15c., from Middle French subsequent (14c.) and directly from Latin
subsequentem (nominative subsequens), present participle of subsequi come after in time, follow
closely, figuratively imitate, conform to, from sub closely, up to (see sub-) + sequi follow (see
suit (n.)). Related: Subsequently; subsequential.


subsequence (n.)

c.1500, from Late Latin subsequentia act of following, succession, from Latin subsequens (see
subsequent). Related: Subsequency.


preposterous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin praeposterus absurd, contrary to nature, inverted, perverted, in reverse order,
literally before-behind (compare topsy-turvy, cart before the horse), from prae before + posterus
subsequent. Related: Preposterously; preposterousness.


sequent (adj.)

1550s, following, from Old French sequent following, subsequent, from Latin sequentem (nominative
sequens) next, following, present participle of sequi to follow (see sequel). As a noun from 1580s.


anabasis (n.)

1706, from Greek, military expedition, literally a going up (from the coast), especially in
reference to the advance of Cyrus the Younger from near the Aegean coast into Asia, and the
subsequent story of the retreat of the 10,000 narrated by Xenophon (401 B.C.E.), from anabainein to
go up, mount; from ana up (see ana-) + bainein to go (see come).


posterior (adj.)

1530s, later, from Latin posterior after, later, behind, comparative of posterus coming after,
subsequent, from post after (see post-). Meaning situated behind is from 1630s.


yo-yo (n.)

1915, apparently from a language of the Philippines. Registered as a trademark in Vancouver, Canada,
in 1932, the year the first craze for them began (subsequent fads 1950s, 1970s, 1998). The toy
itself is much older and was earlier known as bandalore (1802), a word of obscure origin, but it was
from American contact in the Philippines that the first commercial development was established
[Century Dictionary]. Figurative sense of any up-and-down movement is first recorded 1932. Meaning
stupid person is recorded from 1970. The verb in the figurative sense is attested from 1967.


Hackney

late 12c., from Old English Hacan ieg Haca's Isle (or possibly Hook Island), the isle element here
meaning dry land in a marsh. Now well within London, it once was pastoral and horses apparently were
kept there. Hence hackney small saddle horse let out for hire (c.1300), with subsequent
deterioration of sense (see hack (n.2)). And compare French haquen&eacute;e ambling nag, an English
loan-word.


hoi polloi

1837, from Greek hoi polloi (plural) the people, literally the many (plural of polys; see poly-).
Used in Greek by Dryden (1668) and Byron (1822), in both cases preceded by the, even though Greek
hoi means the, a mistake repeated often by subsequent writers, who at least have the excuse of
ignorance of Greek.


posterity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French posterit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin posteritatem (nominative posteritas)
future, future time; after-generation, offspring; literally the condition of coming after, from
posterus coming after, subsequent, from post after (see post-). Old English words for this included
&aelig;ftercneoreso, framcynn.


talon (n.)

c.1400, talounz claws of a bird or beast, probably originally from Old French talon heel or hinder
part of the foot of a beast, or of a man, or of a shoe; foot-step (12c.), from Medieval Latin
talonem heel, from Latin talus ankle (see talus (n.1)). The extension to birds of prey, and
subsequent stages, are peculiar to English [OED].


sith (adv., conj., prep.)

since (obsolete), Middle English, reduced from Old English si&#240;&#240;an then, thereupon;
continuously, during which; seeing that, from *si&eth; &#254;on subsequent to that, from si&#240;
after, from Proto-Germanic *sith- later, after (cognates: Old Saxon sith after that, since, later,
German seit since, Gothic sei&#254;us late), from PIE *se- (2) long, late (see soiree).


postern (n.)

late 13c., back door, private door, from Old French posterne side or rear gate, earlier posterle,
from Late Latin posterula small back door or gate, diminutive of Latin posterus that is behind,
coming after, subsequent, from post after (see post-).


posthumous (adj.)

mid-15c., born after the death of the originator (author or father), from Late Latin posthumus, from
Latin postumus last, last-born, superlative of posterus coming after, subsequent (see posterior).
Altered in Late Latin by association with Latin humare to bury, suggesting death; the one born after
the father's death obviously being the last. An Old English word for this was &aelig;fterboren,
literally after-born. Related: Posthumously.


delirium tremens (n.)

1813, medical Latin, literally trembling delirium, introduced 1813 by British physician Thomas
Sutton, for that form of delirium which is rendered worse by bleeding, but improved by opium. By
Rayer and subsequent writers it has been almost exclusively applied to delirium resulting from the
abuse of alcohol [Sydenham Society Lexicon of Medicine]. As synonyms, Farmer lists barrel-fever,
gallon distemper, blue Johnnies, bottle ache, pink spiders, quart-mania snakes in the boots,
triangles, uglies, etc.


set (n.1)

collection of things, mid-15c., from Old French sette sequence, variant of secte religious
community, from Medieval Latin secta retinue, from Latin secta a following (see sect). [I]n
subsequent developments of meaning influenced by SET v.1 and apprehended as equivalent to 'number
set together' [OED]. The noun set was in Middle English, but only in the sense of religious sect
(late 14c.), which likely is the direct source of some modern meanings, such as group of persons
with shared status, habits, etc. (1680s).    Meaning complete collection of pieces is from 1680s.
Meaning group of pieces musicians perform at a club during 45 minutes (more or less) is from c.1925,
though it is found in a similar sense in 1580s. Set piece is from 1846 as grouping of people in a
work of visual art; from 1932 in reference to literary works.


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


caucus (n.)

private meeting of party leaders, 1763, American English (New England), perhaps from an Algonquian
word caucauasu counselor, elder, adviser in the dialect of Virginia, or from the Caucus Club of
Boston, a 1760s social &amp; political club whose name possibly derived from Modern Greek kaukos
drinking cup. Another old guess is caulker's (meeting) [Pickering, 1816], but OED finds this
dismissable.    caucus: This noun is used throughout the United States, as a cant term for those
meetings, which are held by the different political parties, for the purpose of agreeing upon
candidates for office, or concerting any measure, which they intend to carry at the subsequent
public, or town meetings. [John Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which
Have Been Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]   <hr />   The word
caucus, and its derivative caucusing, are often used in Boston. The last answers much to what we
stile parliamenteering or electioneering. All my repeated applications to different gentlemen have
not furnished me with a satisfactory account of the origin of caucus. It seems to mean, a number of
persons, whether more or less, met together to consult upon adopting and prosecuting some scheme of
policy, for carrying a favorite point. [William Gordon, History, Rise, Progress, and Establishment
of the Independence of the United States of America, London, 1788]


California

name of an imaginary realm in Las sergas de Esplandi&aacute;n (Exploits of Esplad&aacute;n), a
romance by Spanish writer Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo, published in 1510. It was a
sequel to his Amadis de Gaula, and was said to have been influential among Spanish explorers of the
New World. It could have led them to misidentify Baja California as this mythical land and to
mistake it for an island. The Amadis tales are the Iberian equivalent of the Arthurian romances;
they are older than 1510 (traces of them have been found mid-14c.) and were wildly popular. That
conquistadors and sailors would have known the story in all its imaginative detail is hardly
surprising.   Amadis de Gaula ... set a fashion: all later Spanish writers of books of chivalry
adopted the machinery of Amadis de Gaula. Later knights were not less brave (they could not be
braver than) Amadis; heroines were not less lovely (they could not be lovelier) than Oriana; there
was nothing for it but to make the dragons more appalling, the giants larger, the wizards craftier,
the magic castles more inaccessible, the enchanted lakes deeper. Subsequent books of chivalry are
simple variants of the types in Amadis de Gaula: Cervantes made his barber describe it as 'the best
of all books of this kind.' This verdict is essentially just. Amadis de Gaula was read everywhere,
especially in the French version of Herberay des Essarts. It was done into Hebrew during the
sixteenth century, and attracted readers as different as St Ignatius of Loyola and Henry of Navarre.
Its vogue perhaps somewhat exceeded its merit, but its merits are not inconsiderable. [James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Spanish Literature, 1922 edition]    Where Montalvo got the name and what it
means, if anything, is a mystery. Californian is attested from 1785. The element Californium (1950)
was named in reference to University of California, where it was discovered.


