substantive (n.)

in grammatical use, late 14c., short for noun substantive, from Late Latin substantivium, neuter of
substantivus of substance or being (see substantive (adj.)). Latin nomen substantivum was name or
word of substance.


substantive (adj.)

mid-15c., standing by itself, from Old French substantif, from Late Latin substantivus of substance
or being, self-existent, from Latin substantia being, essence, material (see substance). The
grammatical term (late 14c.) was introduced by the French to denote the noun in contradistinction to
the adjective, from Latin nomen substantivum name or word of substance. Related: Substantival;
substantively.


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


-ory

adjective and noun suffix, having to do with, characterized by, tending to, place for, from Middle
English -orie, from Old North French -ory, -orie (Old French -oir, -oire), from Latin -orius, -oria,
-orium.    Latin adjectives in -orius, according to An Etymological Dictionary of the French
Language, tended to indicate a quality proper to the action accomplished by the agent; as oratorius
from orator; laudatorius from laudator. The neuter of these adjectives was early employed as a
substantive, and usually denoted the place of residence of the agent or the instrument that he uses;
as praetorium from praetor; dormitorium from dormitor; auditorium, dolatorium.    These newer words,
already frequent under the Empire, became exceedingly numerous at a later time, especially in
ecclesiastical and scholastic Latin; as purgatorium, refectorium, laboratorium, observatorium,
&amp;c.; [transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]


