subversive (adj.)

1640s, from Latin subvers-, past participle stem of subvertere (see subvert) + -ive. As a noun,
attested from 1887. Related: Subversively; subversiveness.


enlightenment (n.)

1660s, action of enlightening, from enlighten + -ment. Used only in figurative sense, of spiritual
enlightenment, etc. Attested from 1865 as a translation of German Aufkl&auml;rung, a name for the
spirit and system of Continental philosophers in the 18c.The philosophy of the Enlightenment
insisted on man's essential autonomy: man is responsible to himself, to his own rational interests,
to his self-development, and, by an inescapable extension, to the welfare of his fellow man. For the
philosophes, man was not a sinner, at least not by nature; human nature -- and this argument was
subversive, in fact revolutionary, in their day -- is by origin good, or at least neutral. Despite
the undeniable power of man's antisocial passions, therefore, the individual may hope for
improvement through his own efforts -- through education, participation in politics, activity in
behalf of reform, but not through prayer. [Peter Gay, The Enlightenment]


censor (n.)

1530s, Roman magistrate who took censuses and oversaw public morals, from Middle French censor and
directly from Latin censor, from censere to appraise, value, judge, from PIE root *kens- speak
solemnly, announce (cognates: Sanskrit &#347;amsati recites, praises, &#347;asa song of praise).
There were two of them at a time in classical times, usually patricians, and they also had charge of
public finances and public works. Transferred sense of officious judge of morals and conduct in
English is from 1590s. Roman censor also had a transferred sense of a severe judge; a rigid
moralist; a censurer. Of books, plays (later films, etc.), 1640s. By the early decades of the 19c.
the meaning of the English word had shaded into state agent charged with suppression of speech or
published matter deemed politically subversive. Related: Censorial.


