succor (v.)

late 13c., help or relieve when in difficulty, from Old French succurre to help, assist (Modern
French secourir), from Latin succerrere to help, assist (see succor (n.)). Related: Succored;
succoring.


succor (n.)

c.1200, socour, earlier socours aid, help, from Anglo-French succors help, aid, Old French socors,
sucurres aid, help, assistance (Modern French secours), from Medieval Latin succursus help,
assistance, from past participle of Latin succurrere run to help, hasten to the aid of, from
assimilated form of sub up to (see sub-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Final -s mistaken in
English as a plural inflection and dropped late 13c. Meaning one who aids or helps is from c.1300.


succour

chiefly British English spelling of succor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


help (n.)

Old English help (m.), helpe (f.) assistance, succor; see help (v.). Most Germanic languages also
have the noun form, such as Old Norse hjalp, Swedish hj&auml;lp, Old Frisian helpe, Dutch hulp, Old
High German helfa, German Hilfe. Use of help as euphemism for servant is American English, 1640s,
tied up in notions of class and race.A domestic servant of American birth, and without negro blood
in his or her veins ... is not a servant, but a 'help.' 'Help wanted,' is the common heading of
advertisements in the North, when servants are required. [Chas. Mackay, Life and Liberty in America,
1859].  Though help also meant assistant, helper, supporter in Middle English (c.1200).


help (v.)

Old English helpan (class III strong verb; past tense healp, past participle holpen) help, support,
succor; benefit, do good to; cure, amend, from Proto-Germanic *helpan (cognates: Old Norse hjalpa,
Old Frisian helpa, Middle Dutch and Dutch helpen, Old High German helfan, German helfen), from PIE
root *kelb- to help (cognates: Lithuanian selpiu to support, help).    Recorded as a cry of distress
from late 14c. Sense of serve someone with food at table (1680s) is translated from French servir to
help, stead, avail, and led to helping portion of food. Related: Helped (c.1300). The Middle English
past participle holpen survives in biblical and U.S. dialectal use.


