suckle (v.)

c.1400, perhaps a causative or frequentative form of Middle English suken to suck (see suck), but
OED suggests instead a back-formation from suckling (though this word is attested only from mid-
15c.). Related: Suckled; suckling.


fecund (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fecond, from Latin fecundus fruitful, fertile, productive, from *fe-
kwondo-, suffixed form of Latin root *fe-, corresponding to PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, also
produce, yield (cognates: Sanskrit dhayati sucks, dhayah nourishing; Greek thele mother's breast,
nipple, thelys female, fruitful; Old Church Slavonic dojiti to suckle, dojilica nurse, deti child;
Lithuanian dele leech; Old Prussian dadan milk; Gothic daddjan to suckle; Old Swedish dia suckle;
Old High German tila female breast; Old Irish denaim I suck, dinu lamb).    Also from the same Latin
root come felare to suck; femina woman (*fe-mna-, literally she who suckles); felix happy,
auspicious, fruitful; fetus offspring, pregnancy; fenum hay (probably literally produce); and
probably filia/filius daughter/son, assimilated from *felios, originally a suckling.


nutriment (n.)

1540s, from Latin nutrimentum nourishment; support, from nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed, from PIE
*nu-tri-, from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to suckle (cognates: Sanskrit snauti she
drips, gives milk; Greek nan I flow), extended form of root *sna- to swim (see natatorium).


dug (n.)

animal nipple, or, contemptuously, the human female breast, 1520s, origin obscure, related to
Swedish dagga, Danish d&aelig;gge to suckle.


nutrient (n.)

a nutritious substance, 1828, noun use of adjective (1640s) meaning providing nourishment, from
Latin nutrientem (nominative nutriens), present participle of nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed,
foster (see nourish).


nurse (v.)

1530s, to suckle (an infant); 1520s in the passive sense, to bring up (a child); alteration of
Middle English nurshen (13c.; see nourish), Sense of take care of (a sick person) is first recorded
1736. Related: Nursed; nursing.


nutrition (n.)

early 15c., from Old French nutrition (14c.) and directly from Latin nutritionem (nominative
nutritio) a nourishing, noun of action from past participle stem of nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish).


felicity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French felicite (14c.) happiness, from Latin felicitatem (nominative felicitas)
happiness, fertility, from felix (genitive felicis) happy, fortunate, fruitful, fertile, from Latin
root *fe-, equivalent of PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, produce, yield (see fecund).


masto-

before vowels mast-, word-forming element meaning breast, from comb. form of Greek mastos woman's
breast, from madan to be wet, to flow, from PIE *mad- wet, moist, dripping (cognates: Latin madere
be moist; Albanian mend suckle; see mast (n.2)).


nursery (n.)

c.1400, breeding, nursing, from Old French norture, norreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia a nursing, suckling, from Latin nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish). Meaning place or room for infants and young children and their nurse is from c.1300. As a
type of school, 1580s. Horticultural sense is from 1560s. Nursery rhyme is from 1832.


filial (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French filial, from Late Latin filialis of a son or daughter, from Latin
filius son, filia daughter, possibly from a suffixed form of PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow
(see be), though *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle (see fecund) is more likely [Watkins].


milk (v.)

Old English melcan, milcian, meolcian to milk, give milk, suckle, from Proto-Germanic *melk- to milk
(cognates: Dutch melken, Old High German melchan, German melken), from PIE root *melg- (see milk
(n.)). Figurative sense of exploit for profit is first found 1520s. Related: Milked; milking.


fetus (n.)

late 14c., the young while in the womb or egg, from Latin fetus (often, incorrectly, foetus) the
bearing, bringing forth, or hatching of young, from Latin base *fe- to generate, bear, also to suck,
suckle (see fecund).    In Latin, fetus sometimes was transferred figuratively to the newborn
creature itself, or used in a sense of offspring, brood (as in Horace's Germania quos horrida
parturit Fetus), but this was not the basic meaning. Also used of plants, in the sense of fruit,
produce, shoot. The spelling foetus is sometimes attempted as a learned Latinism, but it is not
historic.


nurse (n.1)

12c., nurrice wet-nurse, foster-mother to a young child (modern form from late 14c.), from Old
French norrice foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin
*nutricia nurse, governess, tutoress, noun use of fem. of Latin nutricius that suckles, nourishes,
from nutrix (genitive nutricis) wet-nurse, from nutrire to suckle (see nourish). Meaning person who
takes care of sick in English first recorded 1580s.


nourish (v.)

late 13c., to bring up, nurture (a child, a feeling, etc.), from Old French norriss-, stem of norrir
raise, bring up, nurture, foster; maintain, provide for (12c., Modern French nourrir), from Latin
nutrire to feed, nurse, foster, support, preserve, from *nutri (older form of nutrix nurse),
literally she who gives suck, from PIE *nu- (from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to
suckle; see nutriment) + fem. agent suffix. Related: Nourished; nourishing.


lactation (n.)

1660s, process of suckling an infant, from French lactation, from Late Latin lactationem (nominative
lactatio) a suckling, noun of action from past participle stem of lactare suckle, from lac (genitive
lactis) milk, from PIE root *glakt- (cognates: Greek gala, genitive galaktos, milk), which, along
with *melg- (see milk (n.)), accounts for words for milk in most Indo-European languages (the
absence of a common word for it is considered a mystery). Meaning process of secreting milk from the
breasts first recorded 1857. Middle Irish lacht, Welsh llaeth milk are loan words from Latin.


feminine (adj.)

mid-14c., of the female sex, from Old French femenin (12c.) feminine, female; with feminine
qualities, effeminate, from Latin femininus feminine (in the grammatical sense at first), from
femina woman, female, literally she who suckles, from root of felare to suck, suckle (see fecund).
Sense of woman-like, proper to or characteristic of women is recorded from mid-15c.    The interplay
of meanings now represented in female, feminine, and effeminate, and the attempt to make them clear
and separate, has led to many coinages: feminitude (1878); feminile feminine (1640s); feminility
womanliness (1838); femality (17c., effeminacy; 1754 female nature). Also feminality (1640s, quality
or state of being female), from rare adjective feminal (late 14c.), from Old French feminal. And
femineity quality or state of being feminine, from Latin femineus of a woman, pertaining to a woman.


