suitor (n.)

c.1300, a frequenter; late 14c., follower, disciple, from Anglo-French seutor, suitor or directly
from Late Latin secutor follower, pursuer, from sect- past participle stem of sequi to follow (see
suit (n.)). Meaning plaintiff in a lawsuit is from mid-15c. Meaning one who seeks (a woman) in
marriage is from 1580s.


Clytaemnestra

also Clytemnestra, wife and murderess of Agamemnon, from Greek Klytaimnestra, from klytos
celebrated, heard of (see loud) + mnester wooer, suitor, literally willing to mind, mindful of,
related to mnasthai to remember, from PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).


shine (n.)

1520s, brightness, from shine (v.). Meaning polish given to a pair of boots is from 1871. Derogatory
meaning black person is from 1908 (perhaps from glossiness of skin or, on another guess, from
frequent employment as shoeshines). Phrase to take a shine to fancy is American English slang from
1839, perhaps from shine up to attempt to please as a suitor. Shiner is from late 14c. as something
that shines; sense of black eye first recorded 1904.


beau (n.)

attendant suitor of a lady, 1720, from French beau the beautiful, noun use of an adjective, from Old
French bel beautiful, handsome, fair, genuine, real (11c.), from Latin bellus handsome, fine,
pretty, agreeable, diminutive of bonus good (see bene-). Meaning man who attends excessively to
dress, etiquette, etc.; a fop; a dandy is from 1680s, short for French beau gar&ccedil;on pretty boy
(1660s).


bridegroom (n.)

Old English brydguma suitor, from bryd bride (see bride) + guma man (source also of Old Norse gumi,
Old High German gomo, cognate with Latin homo man; see homunculus). Ending altered 16c. by folk
etymology after groom (n.) groom, boy, lad (q.v.).    Common Germanic compound (compare Old Saxon
brudigumo, Old Norse bru&eth;gumi, Old High German brutigomo, German Br&auml;utigam), except in
Gothic, which used bru&thorn;sfa&thorn;s, literally bride's lord.


marry (v.)

c.1300, to give (offspring) in marriage, from Old French marier to get married; to marry off, give
in marriage; to bring together in marriage, from Latin maritare to wed, marry, give in marriage
(source of Italian maritare, Spanish and Portuguese maridar), from maritus (n.) married man,
husband, of uncertain origin, originally a past participle, perhaps ultimately from provided with a
*mari, a young woman, from PIE root *mari- young wife, young woman, akin to *meryo- young man
(source of Sanskrit marya- young man, suitor).    Meaning to get married, join (with someone) in
matrimony is early 14c. in English, as is that of to take in marriage. Said from 1520s of the
priest, etc., who performs the rite. Figurative use from early 15c. Related: Married; marrying.
Phrase the marrying kind, describing one inclined toward marriage and almost always used with a
negative, is attested by 1824, probably short for marrying kind of men, which is from a popular 1756
essay by Chesterfield.    In some Indo-European languages there were distinct marry verbs for men
and women, though some of these have become generalized. Compare Latin ducere uxorem (of men),
literally to lead a wife; nubere (of women), perhaps originally to veil [Buck]. Also compare Old
Norse kvangask (of men) from kvan wife (see quean), so, take a wife; giptask (of women), from gipta,
a specialized use of to give (see gift (n.)), so, to be given.


