sullen (adj.)

1570s, alteration of Middle English soleyn unique, singular, from Anglo-French *solein, formed on
the pattern of Old French solain lonely, from soul single, from Latin solus by oneself, alone (see
sole (adj.)). The sense shift in Middle English from solitary to morose (i.e. remaining alone
through ill-humor) occurred late 14c. Related: Sullenly; sullenness.


glum (adj.)

1540s, sullen, frowning, from Middle English gloumen (v.) become dark (c.1300), later gloumben look
gloomy or sullen (late 14c.); see gloom. Related: Glumly; glumness.


gloom

c.1300 as a verb, to look sullen or displeased, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian
dialectal glome to stare somberly). Not considered to be related to Old English glom twilight, but
perhaps to Middle Low German glum turbid, Dutch gluren to leer. The noun is 1590s in Scottish,
sullen look, from the verb. Sense of darkness, obscurity is first recorded 1629 in Milton's poetry;
that of melancholy is 1744 (gloomy in this sense is attested from 1580s).


melancholy (adj.)

late 14c., with or caused by black bile; sullen, gloomy, sad, from melancholy (n.); sense of
deplorable (of a fact or state of things) is from 1710.


dour (adj.)

mid-14c., severe, from Scottish and northern England dialect, probably from Latin durus hard (see
endure); sense of gloomy, sullen is late 15c.


gloomy (adj.)

1580s, probably from gloom even though that word is not attested as early as this one is.
Shakespeare used it of woods, Marlowe of persons. Gloomy Gus used in a general sense of sullen
person since 1940s, from a comic strip character of that name first recorded 1904. Related:
Gloomily; gloominess.


distingue (adj.)

having an air of distinction, 1813 (in Byron), from French distingu&eacute;, literally
distinguished, past participle of distinguer (see distinguish).    The girls I knew had sad and
sullen gray faces   With distingu&eacute; traces   That used to be there -- You could see where
they'd been washed away   By too many through the day   Twelve o'clock tales.  [Lush Life, Billy
Strayhorn, age 17]


splenetic (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to the spleen, from Late Latin spleneticus, from splen (see spleen). Meaning
irritably morose is from 1590s. Alternative splenic (1610s) is from French spl&#233;nique (16c.).
Gloomy, Sullen, Sulky, Morose, Splenetic. These words are arranged in the order of their intensity
and of their degree of activity toward others. [Century Dictionary]


beetle (v.)

project, overhang, c.1600, back-formation from bitelbrouwed grim-browed, sullen (mid-14c.), from
bitel sharp-edged, sharp (c.1200), probably a compound from Old English *bitol biting, sharp,
related to bite, + brow, which in Middle English meant eyebrow, not forehead. Meaning to overhang
dangerously (of cliffs, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Beetled; beetling.


wuthering (adj.)

making a sullen roar (as the wind does), Northern England dialectal variant of Scottish and
dialectal whithering rushing, whizzing, blustering, from a verb whither (late 14c.) which was used
in reference to gusts of wind and coughing fits, from Old Norse *hvi&eth;ra (related to Norwegian
kvidra to go quickly to and fro, Old English hwi&thorn;a air, breeze).    Wuthering Heights is the
name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling. 'Wuthering' being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive
of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed, in stormy weather. [Emily Bront&#235;,
Wuthering Heights, 1847]    Charlotte also used forms of the word in her novels.


sulky (adj.)

quietly sullen, 1744, of uncertain origin. Connection has been suggested to obsolete, rare sulke
hard to sell (1630s) and to Old English asolcen idle, lazy, slow, past participle adjective from
aseolcan become sluggish, be weak or idle (related to besylcan be languid), from Proto-Germanic
*seklan (cognates: Middle High German selken to drop, fall). But words of similar meaning often are
held to be imitative (compare miff, mope, boudoir). Related: Sulkily; sulkiness.


shall (v.)

Old English sceal, Northumbrian scule I owe/he owes, will have to, ought to, must (infinitive
sculan, past tense sceolde), a common Germanic preterite-present verb (along with can, may, will),
from Proto-Germanic *skal- (cognates: Old Saxon sculan, Old Frisian skil, Old Norse and Swedish
skola, Middle Dutch sullen, Old High German solan, German sollen, Gothic skulan to owe, be under
obligation; related via past tense form to Old English scyld guilt, German Schuld guilt, debt; also
Old Norse Skuld, name of one of the Norns), from PIE root *skel- (2) to be under an obligation.
Ground sense of the Germanic word probably is I owe, hence I ought. The sense shifted in Middle
English from a notion of obligation to include futurity. Its past tense form has become should
(q.v.). Cognates outside Germanic are Lithuanian skeleti to be guilty, skilti to get into debt; Old
Prussian skallisnan duty, skellants guilty.


death (n.)

Old English dea&eth; death, dying, cause of death, in plura, ghosts, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon doth, Old Frisian dath, Dutch dood, Old High German tod, German Tod, Old Norse
dau&eth;i, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Gothic dau&thorn;as death), from verbal stem *dheu-
(3) to die (see die (v.)) + *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition.    I would not that
death should take me asleep. I would not have him meerly seise me, and onely declare me to be dead,
but win me, and overcome me. When I must shipwrack, I would do it in a sea, where mine impotencie
might have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as exercise for
my swimming. [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]   Death's-head, a symbol of
mortality, is from 1590s. Death row first recorded 1940s. Death knell is attested from 1814; death
penalty from 1875; death rate from 1859. Slang be death on be very good at is from 1839. Death wish
first recorded 1896. The death-watch beetle (1660s) inhabits houses, makes a ticking noise like a
watch, and was superstitiously supposed to portend death.    FEW ears have escaped the noise of the
death-watch, that is, the little clickling sound heard often in many rooms, somewhat resembling that
of a watch; and this is conceived to be of an evil omen or prediction of some person's death:
wherein notwithstanding there is nothing of rational presage or just cause of terror unto melancholy
and meticulous heads. For this noise is made by a little sheathwinged grey insect, found often in
wainscot benches and wood-work in the summer. [Browne, Vulgar Errors]


