sumptuous (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French sumptueux or directly from Latin sumptuosus costly, very expensive;
lavish, wasteful, from sumptus, past participle of sumere to borrow, buy, spend, eat, drink,
consume, employ, take, take up, contraction of *sub-emere, from sub- under (see sub-) + emere to
take, buy (see exempt (adj.)). Related: Sumptuously; sumptuousness.


scrumptious (adj.)

1833, in countrified humor writing of Major Jack Downing of Maine (Seba Smith); probably a
colloquial alteration of sumptuous. Originally stylish, splendid; sense of delicious is by 1881.
Related: Scrumptiously; scrumptiousness.


princely (adj.)

c.1500, of a prince, from prince + -ly (2). Meaning sumptuous, magnificent is from 1530s.


sumptuary (adj.)

pertaining to expense, c.1600, from Latin sumptuarius relating to expenses, from sumptus expense,
cost, from sumere to spend, consume (see sumptuous).


banquet (n.)

late 15c., feast, sumptuous entertainment, from French banquet (15c.; in Old French only small
bench), from Old Italian banchetto, diminutive of banco bench; originally a snack eaten on a bench
(rather than at table), hence a slight repast between meals; the meaning has entirely reversed. As a
verb from 1510s.


splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


rich (adj.)

Old English rice strong, powerful; great, mighty; of high rank, in later Old English wealthy, from
Proto-Germanic *rikijaz (cognates: Old Norse rikr, Swedish rik, Danish rig, Old Frisian rike
wealthy, mighty, Dutch rijk, Old High German rihhi ruler, powerful, rich, German reich rich, Gothic
reiks ruler, powerful, rich), borrowed from a Celtic source akin to Gaulish *rix, Old Irish ri
(genitive rig) king, from PIE root *reg- move in a straight line, hence, direct, rule (see rex).
The form of the word was influenced in Middle English by Old French riche wealthy, magnificent,
sumptuous, which is, with Spanish rico, Italian ricco, from Frankish *riki powerful, or some other
cognate Germanic source.    Old English also had a noun, rice rule, reign, power, might; authority;
empire. The evolution of the word reflects a connection between wealth and power in the ancient
world. Of food and colors, from early 14c.; of sounds, from 1590s. Sense of entertaining, amusing is
recorded from 1760. The noun meaning the wealthy was in Old English.


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


red (adj.1)

Old English read red, from Proto-Germanic *rauthaz (cognates: Old Norse rau&eth;r, Danish
r&oslash;d, Old Saxon rod, Old Frisian rad, Middle Dutch root, Dutch rood, German rot, Gothic
rau&thorn;s). As a noun from mid-13c.    The Germanic words are from PIE root *reudh- red, ruddy
(cognates: Latin ruber, also dialectal rufus light red, mostly of hair; Greek erythros; Sanskrit
rudhira-; Avestan raoidita-; Old Church Slavonic rudru, Polish rumiany, Russian rumjanyj flushed,
red, of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas; Old Irish ruad, Welsh rhudd, Breton ruz red). The only
color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is
because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r-.    Along with dead, bread (n.), lead (n.1),
the vowel shortened in Middle English. The surname Read/Reid retains the original Old English long
vowel pronunciation and is the corresponding surname to Brown-, Black, White.    The color
designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s. The color as characteristic of British
possessions on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism,
from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag,
1852. The red flag was used as a symbol of defiance in battle on land or sea from c.1600. To see red
get angry is an American English expression first recorded 1898. Red rover, the children's game,
attested from 1891. Red light as a sign to stop is from 1849, long before traffic signals. As the
sign of a brothel, it is attested from 1899. As a children's game (in reference to the traffic light
meaning) it is recorded from 1953.   Red-letter day (late 14c.) was originally a saint's day, marked
on church calendars in red letters. Red ball signifying express in railroad jargon is 1904,
originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog, type of U.S. football pass
rush, is recorded from 1959. Red meat is from 1808. Red shift in spectography is first recorded
1923. Red carpet sumptuous welcome is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far
back as Aeschylus (Agamemnon); it also was the name of a type of English moth.


