sunny (adj.)

full of sun, early 14c., from sun (n.) + -y (2). Compare Dutch zonnig, German sonnig. Figurative
sense of cheerful is attested from 1540s. Sunny side in reference to optimistic outlook is from
1831. Eggs served sunny side up first attested 1887, in lunch counter slang, in reference to
appearance when served.    Young Man (in Park Row coffee-and-cake saloon)--Waiter, I want a
beefsteak, unpeeled potatoes, and a couple of eggs fried on one side only!    Waiter
(vociferously)--Slaughter in the pan, a Murphy with his coat on, an' two white wings with the sunny
side up! [Puck, April 27, 1887]     Related: Sunnily; sunniness. As a noun meaning sunfish from
1835.


sunfish (n.)

1620s, from sun (n.) + fish (n.). Used of various species, with reference to round shape or
brilliant appearance. Short form sunny is attested from 1835.


girl (n.)

c.1300, gyrle child (of either sex), of unknown origin; current scholarship [OED says] leans toward
an unrecorded Old English *gyrele, from Proto-Germanic *gurwilon-, diminutive of *gurwjoz
(apparently also represented by Low German g&aelig;re boy, girl, Norwegian dialectal gorre, Swedish
dialectal gurre small child, though the exact relationship, if any, between all these is obscure),
from PIE *ghwrgh-, also found in Greek parthenos virgin. But this is highly conjectural. And
Liberman (2008) writes:   Girl does not go back to any Old English or Old Germanic form. It is part
of a large group of Germanic words whose root begins with a g or k and ends in r. The final
consonant in girl is a diminutive suffix. The g-r words denote young animals, children, and all
kinds of creatures considered immature, worthless, or past their prime.    Another candidate is Old
English gierela garment (for possible sense evolution in this theory, compare brat). Like boy, lass,
lad it is of obscure origin. Probably most of them arose as jocular transferred uses of words that
had originally different meaning [OED]. Specific meaning of female child is late 14c. Applied to any
young unmarried woman since mid-15c. Meaning sweetheart is from 1640s. Girl next door as a type of
unflashy attractiveness is recorded by 1953.    Doris [Day] was a big vocalist even before she hit
the movies in 1948. There, as the latest movie colony girl next door, sunny-faced Doris soon became
a leading movie attraction as well as the world's top female recording star. She's the girl next
door, all right, said one Hollywood admirer. Next door to the bank. [Life magazine, Dec. 22, 1958]
Girl Friday is from 1940, a reference to Robinson Crusoe.


