superficiality (n.)

1520s, from superficial + -ity.


superficial (adj.)

late 14c., in anatomical and mathematical uses, of or relating to a surface, from Late Latin
superficialis of or pertaining to the surface, from superficies surface, upper side, top, from super
above, over (see super-) + facies form, face (see face (n.)). Meaning not deep, without thorough
understanding, cursory, comprehending only what is apparent or obvious (of perceptions, thoughts,
etc.) first recorded early 15c. (implied in superficially not thoroughly).


smatterer (n.)

one who has but slight or superficial knowledge, 1510s, agent noun from smatter (v.).


smattering (n.)

a slight or superficial knowledge, 1530s, verbal noun from smatter (v.).


shallow (adj.)

c.1400, schalowe not deep, probably from or related to Old English sceald (see shoal (n.)). Of
breathing, attested from 1875; of thought or feeling, superficial, first recorded 1580s. The noun,
usually shallows, is first recorded 1570s, from the adjective.


cosmetic (adj.)

1640s, from French cosm&eacute;tique (16c.), from Greek kosmetikos skilled in adornment or
arrangement, from kosmein to arrange, adorn, from kosmos order (see cosmos). Figurative sense of
superficial is from 1955. Related: Cosmetically.


hardly (adv.)

c.1200, in a hard manner, with great exertion or effort, from Old English heardlic stern, severe,
harsh; bold, warlike (see hard + -ly (2)). Hence assuredly, certainly (early 14c.). Main modern
sense of barely, just (1540s) reverses this, via the intermediate meaning not easily, with trouble
(early 15c.). Formerly with superficial negative (not hardly).


desultory (adj.)

1580s, skipping about, from Latin desultorius hasty, casual, superficial, adjective form of desultor
(n.) a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop, from
desul-, stem of desilire jump down, from de- down (see de-) + salire to jump, leap (see salient
(adj.)). Sense of irregular, without aim or method is c.1740. Related: Desultorily; desultoriness.


hectare (n.)

1810, from French hectare a hundred ares, formed from Greek hekaton hundred (see hecatomb) + Latin
area vacant piece of ground (see area). A superficial measure containing 100 ares, coined by decree
of the French National Convention in 1795.


surface (n.)

1610s, from French surface an outermost boundary, outside part (16c.), from Old French sur- above
(see sur-) + face (see face (n.)). Patterned on Latin superficies surface, upper side, top (see
superficial). As an adjective from 1660s.


plastic (adj.)

1630s, capable of shaping or molding, from Latin plasticus, from Greek plastikos able to be molded,
pertaining to molding, fit for molding, also in reference to the arts, from plastos molded, formed,
verbal adjective from plassein to mold (see plasma). Surgical sense of remedying a deficiency of
structure is first recorded 1839 (in plastic surgery). Meaning made of plastic is from 1909. Picked
up in counterculture slang with meaning false, superficial (1963). Plastic explosive (n.) attested
from 1894.


apparent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French aparant evident, obvious, visible, from Latin apparentem (nominative
apparens) visible, manifest, present participle of apparere (see appear). First attested in phrase
heir apparent (see heir). Meaning superficial is c.1400. Apparent magnitude in astronomy (how bright
a heavenly body looks from earth, as opposed to absolute magnitude, which is how bright it really
is) is attested from 1875.


do-gooder (n.)

a person who seeks to correct social ills in an idealistic, but usually impractical or superficial,
way, 1650s (as do-good), in Zootomia, or Observations on the Present Manners of the English: Briefly
Anatomizing the Living by the Dead. With An Usefull Detection of the Mountebanks of Both Sexes,
written by Richard Whitlock, a medical doctor. Probably used even then with a taint of impractical
idealism. Modern pejorative use seems to have begun on the socialist left, mocking those who were
unwilling to take a hard line. OED has this citation, from The Nation in 1923:    There is nothing
the matter with the United States except ... the parlor socialists, up-lifters, and do-goods.    The
form do-gooder appears in American English from 1927, presumably because do-good was no longer felt
as sufficiently noun-like. A slightly older word for this was goo-goo.


apothecary (n.)

mid-14c., shopkeeper, especially one who stores, compounds, and sells medicaments, from Old French
apotecaire (13c., Modern French apothicaire), from Late Latin apothecarius storekeeper, from Latin
apotheca storehouse, from Greek apotheke barn, storehouse, literally a place where things are put
away, from apo- away (see apo-) + tithenai to put, to place (see theme). Same root produced French
boutique and Spanish bodega. Cognate compounds produced Sanskrit apadha- concealment, Old Persian
apadana- palace.    Drugs and herbs being among the chief items of non-perishable goods, the meaning
narrowed 17c. to druggist (Apothecaries' Company of London separated from the Grocers' in 1617).
Apothecaries formerly were notorious for the assumed gravity and affectation of knowledge generally
put on by the gentlemen of this profession, who are commonly as superficial in their learning as
they are pedantic in their language [Francis Grose, A Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1796]. Hence, Apothecary's Latin, barbarously mangled, also known as Dog Latin.


Bible (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia, Old French bible (13c.) the Bible, also any large book
generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), in
phrase biblia sacra holy books, a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia the holy books, from Greek
biblion paper, scroll, the ordinary word for book, originally a diminutive of byblos Egyptian
papyrus, possibly so called from Byblos (modern Jebeil, Lebanon), the name of the Phoenician port
from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (compare parchment). Or the place name might be
from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. The Christian scripture was
referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c.223. Bible replaced Old English biblio&eth;ece (see
bibliothek) as the ordinary word for the Scriptures. Figurative sense of any authoritative book is
from 1804.    Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced
me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every
syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and
to that discipline -- patient, accurate, and resolute -- I owe, not only a knowledge of the book,
which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best
part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the
15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by
heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me,
even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John
Ruskin, Fors Clavigera, 1871]


