superfluous (adj.)

early 15c. (earlier superflue, late 14c.), from Latin superfluus unnecessary, literally overflowing,
running over, from superfluere to overflow, from super over (see super-) + fluere to flow (see
fluent). Related: Superfluously; superfluousness.


pleonasm (n.)

redundancy in words, 1580s, from Late Latin pleonasmus, from Greek pleonasmos, from pleonazein to be
more than enough, to be superfluous, in grammatical use, to add superfluously, from comb. form of
pleon more (see pleio-).


superfluity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French superfluite excess (12c.), from Medieval Latin superfluitatem (nominative
superfluitas), from superfluus (see superfluous).


waste (adj.)

c.1300, of land, desolate, uncultivated, from Anglo-French and Old North French waste (Old French
gaste), from Latin vastus (see waste (v.)). From c.1400 as superfluous, excess; 1670s as unfit for
use. Waste-paper attested from 1580s.


scrivener (n.)

professional penman, copyist, late 14c. (early 13c. as a surname), with superfluous -er + scrivein
scribe (c.1300), from Old French escrivain a writer, notary, clerk (Modern French &#233;crivain),
from Vulgar Latin *scribanem accusative of scriba a scribe, from scribere (see script (n.)).


sorcerer (n.)

early 15c., from earlier sorcer (late 14c.), from Old French sorcier, from Medieval Latin sortarius
teller of fortunes by lot; sorcerer (also source of Spanish sortero, Italian sortiere-; see
sorcery). With superfluous -er, as in poulterer, upholsterer. Sorcerer's apprentice translates
l'apprenti sorcier, title of a symphonic poem by Paul Dukas (1897) based on a Goethe ballad (Der
Zauberlehrling, 1797), but the common figurative use of the term (1952) comes after Disney's
Fantasia (1940).


fifth (adj.)

c.1200, fift, from Old English fifta, from fif five (see five) + -ta (see -th (1)). Altered 14c. by
influence of fourth. Compare Old Frisian fifta, Old Saxon fifto, Old Norse fimmti, Dutch vijfde, Old
High German fimfto, German f&uuml;nfte, Gothic fimfta.    Noun meaning fifth part of a gallon of
liquor is first recorded 1938, American English. Fifth Avenue (in New York City) has been used
figuratively for elegance, taste since at least 1858. Fifth wheel superfluous person or thing first
attested 1902. Fifth-monarchy-man, 17c. for anrachist zealot, is a reference to Dan. ii:44.


purge (v.)

c.1300, clear of a charge or suspicion; late 14c., cleanse, clear, purify, from Anglo-French purger,
Old French purgier wash, clean; refine, purify morally or physically (12c., Modern French purger)
and directly from Latin purgare cleanse, make clean; purify, especially of the body, free from what
is superfluous; remove, clear away, figuratively refute, justify, vindicate (also source of Spanish
purgar, Italian purgare), from Old Latin purigare, from purus pure (see pure) + root of agere to
drive, make (see act (n.)). Related: Purged; purging.


chestnut (n.)

1560s, from chesten nut (1510s), with superfluous nut (n.) + Middle English chasteine, from Old
French chastain (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;taigne), from Latin castanea chestnut, chestnut tree,
from Greek kastaneia, which the Greeks thought meant either nut from Castanea in Pontus, or nut from
Castana in Thessaly, but probably both places are named for the trees, not the other way around, and
the word is borrowed from a language of Asia Minor (compare Armenian kask chestnut, kaskeni chestnut
tree). In reference to the dark reddish-brown color, 1650s. Applied to the horse-chestnut by 1832.
Slang sense of venerable joke or story is from 1885, explained 1888 by Joseph Jefferson (see
Lippincott's Monthly Magazine, January 1888) as probably abstracted from the 1816 melodrama The
Broken Sword by William Dimond where an oft-repeated story involving a chestnut tree figures in an
exchange between the characters Captain Zavior and Pablo:   Zav. Let me see--ay! it is exactly six
years since that peace being restored to Spain, and my ship paid off, my kind brother offered me a
snug hammock in the dwelling of my forefathers. I mounted a mule at Barcelona and trotted away for
my native mountains. At the dawn of the fourth day's journey, I entered the wood of Collares, when,
suddenly, from the thick boughs of a cork-tree--   Pab. [Jumping up.] A chesnut, Captain, a chesnut!
Zav. Bah, you booby! I say, a cork!   Pab. And I swear, a chesnut. Captain, this is the twenty-
seventh time 1 have heard you relate this story, and you invariably said, a chesnut, till now.
Jefferson traced the connection through William Warren, the veteran comedian of Boston who often
played Pablo in the melodrama.


