suppressant (n.)

that which suppresses, 1922, from suppress + -ant.


suppression (n.)

early 15c., from Latin suppressionem (nominative suppresio), noun of action from past participle
stem of supprimere (see suppress).


suppress (v.)

late 14c. (implied in suppressing) be burdensome; 1520s as put down by force or authority, from
Latin suppressus, past participle of supprimere press down, stop, hold back, check, stifle, from sub
down, under (see sub-) + premere push against (see press (v.1)). Sense of prevent or prohibit the
circulation of is from 1550s of publications; medical use from 1620s. Related: Suppressed;
suppressing.


squelch (v.)

1620s, to fall, drop, or stomp (on something soft) with crushing force, possibly imitative of sound
made in the process. The figurative sense of suppress completely is first recorded 1864. Related:
Squelched; squelching.


onanism (n.)

masturbation, also coitus interruptus, 1727, from Onan, son of Judah (Gen. xxxviii:9), who spilled
his seed on the ground rather than impregnate his dead brother's wife: And Onan knew that the seed
should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it
on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother. The moral of this verse was redirected
by those who sought to suppress masturbation.


inquisition (n.)

late 14c., judicial investigation, act or process of inquiring, from Old French inquisicion inquiry,
investigation (12c.), from Latin inquisitionem (nominative inquisitio) a searching into, legal
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of inquirere (see inquire).    In Church
history, inquisitors were appointed from 382 C.E. to root out heretics, and the Inquisition refers
to the ecclesiastical court (Congregation of the Holy Office) appointed 13c. by Innocent III to
suppress heresy. It never operated in Britain. The capital letter form appeared in English only
after c.1500, and usually refers to the office's reorganization 1478-1483 in Spain as what is
commonly called the Spanish Inquisition.


hush (v.)

1540s, variant of Middle English huisht (late 14c.), probably of imitative origin, with terminal -t
lost probably by being mistaken for a past tense suffix. Hush-hush (adj.) is 1916 reduplication.
Related: Hushed; hushing. The noun is attested from 1680s. As an interjection meaning be quiet,
attested by c.1600. To hush (one's) mouth be quiet is attested from 1878. Hush up suppress talk for
secrecy's sake is from 1630s. Hush-money is attested from 1709. Hush-puppy deep-fried ball of
cornmeal batter first attested 1899; as a type of lightweight soft shoe, it is a proprietary name,
registered 1961.


quell (v.)

Old English cwellan to kill, murder, execute, from Proto-Germanic *kwaljanan (cognates: Old English
cwelan to die, cwalu violent death; Old Saxon quellian to torture, kill; Old Norse kvelja to
torment; Middle Dutch quelen to vex, tease, torment; Old High German quellan to suffer pain, German
qu&auml;len to torment, torture), from PIE root *gwele- (1) to throw, reach, with extended sense of
to pierce (cognates: Armenian kelem I torture; Old Church Slavonic zali pain; Lithuanian galas end,
gela agony, gelati to sting; see ballistics). Milder sense of suppress, extinguish developed by
c.1300. Related: Quelled; quelling.


suffer (v.)

mid-13c., allow to occur or continue, permit, tolerate, fail to prevent or suppress, also to be made
to undergo, endure, be subjected to (pain, death, punishment, judgment, grief), from Anglo-French
suffrir, Old French sofrir bear, endure, resist; permit, tolerate, allow (Modern French souffrir),
from Vulgar Latin *sufferire, variant of Latin sufferre to bear, undergo, endure, carry or put
under, from sub up, under (see sub-) + ferre to carry (see infer).    Replaced Old English
&thorn;olian, &thorn;rowian. Meaning submit meekly to is from early 14c. Meaning undergo, be subject
to, be affected by, experience; be acted on by an agent is from late 14c. Related: Suffered;
sufferer; suffering. Suffering ______! as an exclamation is attested from 1859.


