supposition (n.)

early 15c., a term in logic, assumption, hypothesis, from Medieval Latin suppositionem (nominative
suppositio) assumption, hypothesis, a supposition, noun of action from past participle stem of
supponere (see suppose); influenced by Greek hypothesis. In classical Latin, a putting under,
substitution. Earlier in English in the same sense was supposal (late 14c.). Related: Suppositional;
suppositionally.


quintain (n.)

target for tilting and jousting practice, c.1400 (in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c.), from Old French
quintaine or directly from Medieval Latin quintana; perhaps from Latin quintana of the fifth (see
quinque-), which as a noun meant the business part of a camp, on the supposition that this was where
military exercises were done [OED].


presupposition (n.)

1530s, from Middle French pr&#233;supposition and directly from Medieval Latin praesuppositionem
(nominative praesuppositio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin  praesupponere, from
prae before (see pre-) + suppositio (see suppose).


hypothesis (n.)

1590s, from Middle French hypothese and directly from Late Latin hypothesis, from Greek hypothesis
base, basis of an argument, supposition, literally a placing under, from hypo- under (see sub-) +
thesis a placing, proposition (see thesis). A term in logic; narrower scientific sense is from
1640s.


spavin (n.)

disease of the hock joint of a horse, early 15c., from Middle French espavain (Modern French
&#233;pavin, cognate with Italian spavenio, Spanish esparavan); in most sources said to be perhaps
from Frankish *sparwan sparrow (see sparrow), on the supposition that a horse affected with spavin
moved with a walk that reminded people of the bird's awkward gait. This seems a stretcher, and
Century Dictionary admits it rests on mere resemblance of form.


lulu (n.)

remarkable person or thing, 1886 (first attested in a baseball article from New Orleans, U.S.), of
uncertain origin; some suggest a connection to earlier looly beautiful girl, of unknown origin. But
the reference more likely is to Lulu Hurst (1869-1950), the Georgia Wonder, who was a popular
attraction 1883-85 demonstrating her supposed mysterious force that allowed her to effortlessly
move, with just a light touch, umbrellas and canes held tight by others. She barnstormed the U.S.
and, at 15, was, briefly, one of the most famous women in the land. The skeptics soon explained her
trick and burst the bubble, but not before her name was used as a word:    Such [musically
uneducated persons] start from the avowed or unavowed supposition that the pianist or violinist's
art necessitates no higher qualities than does plate-spinning, dancing, or the feats of a Lulu. [The
Hero as Virtuoso, in London Society magazine, 1883]


position (n.)

late 14c., as a term in logic and philosophy, from Old French posicion position, supposition (Modern
French position), from Latin positionem (nominative positio) act or fact of placing, situation,
position, affirmation, noun of state from past participle stem of ponere put, place, from PIE
*po-s(i)nere, from *apo- off, away (see apo-) + *sinere to leave, let (see site).    Meaning proper
place occupied by a person or thing is from 1540s. Meaning manner in which some physical thing is
arranged or posed first recorded 1703; specifically in reference to dance steps, 1778, sexual
intercourse, 1883. Meaning official station, employment is from 1890.


chaperon (n.)

1720, woman accompanying a younger, unmarried lady in public, from French chaperon protector,
especially female companion to a young woman, earlier head covering, hood (c.1400), from Old French
chaperon hood, cowl (12c.), diminutive of chape cape (see cap (n.)). ... English writers often
erroneously spell it chaperone, app. under the supposition that it requires a fem. termination
[OED]. The notion is of covering the socially vulnerable one.  May I ask what is a chaperon?    A
married lady; without whom no unmarried one can be seen in public. If the damsel be five and forty,
she cannot appear without the matron; and if the matron be fifteen, it will do.    [Catharine
Hutton, The Welsh Mountaineer, London, 1817]    The word had been used in Middle English in the
literal sense hooded cloak.


misprision (n.)

wrong action, a failure on the part of authority, early 15c., from Anglo-French mesprisioun mistake,
error, wrong action or speech, from Old French mesprision mistake, wrongdoing, fault, blame, crime,
from mespris, past participle of mesprendre to mistake, act wrongly, trespass, transgress, break a
law, from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + prendre take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere seize (see prehensile).    In 16c., misprision of treason was used for lesser degrees of
guilt (those not subject to capital punishment), especially for knowing of treasonable actions or
plots but not informing the authorities. This led to the common supposition in legal writers that
the word means failure to denounce a crime.


