supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


tamarack (n.)

also tamarac, North American black larch, 1805, probably of Algonquian origin (compare synonymous
hackmatack, 1792, from a source akin to Abenaki akemantak a kind of supple wood used for making
snowshoes), but the etymology is unclear.


pliant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ploiant bending, supple; compliant, fickle, as a noun, turncoat (13c.),
present participle of ploier to bend (see ply (n.)). Figurative sense of easily influenced is from
c.1400. Related: Pliancy.


relent (v.)

late 14c., to melt, soften, dissolve, from re- + Latin lentus slow, viscous, supple (see lithe),
perhaps on model of Old French rallentir. Sense of become less harsh or cruel first recorded 1520s.
The notion probably is of a hard heart melting with pity. Related: Relented; relenting.


supplication (n.)

late 14c., from Old French suplicacion humble request, from Latin supplicationem (nominative
supplicatio) a public prayer, thanksgiving day, noun of action from past participle stem of
supplicare plead humbly (see supple). In ancient Rome, a religious solemnity, especially in
thanksgiving for a victory or in times of public danger.


limber (adj.)

pliant, flexible, 1560s, of uncertain origin, possibly from limb (n.1) on notion of supple boughs of
a tree [Barnhart], or from limp flaccid [Skeat], or somehow from Middle English lymer shaft of a
cart (see limber (n.)), but the late appearance of the -b- in that word argues against it. Related:
Limberness. Dryden used limber-ham (see ham (n.1) in the joint sense) as a name for a character
perswaded by what is last said to him, and changing next word.


arc (n.)

late 14c., originally in reference to the sun's apparent motion in the sky, from Old French arc bow,
arch, vault (12c.), from Latin arcus a bow, arch, from PIE root *arku- bowed, curved (cognates:
Gothic arhvazna arrow, Old English earh, Old Norse &ouml;r; also, via notion of supple, flexible,
Greek arkeuthos, Latvian ercis juniper, Russian rakita, Czech rokyta, Serbo-Croatian rakita brittle
willow). Electrical sense is from 1821.


schmuck (n.)

also shmuck, contemptible person, 1892, from East Yiddish shmok, literally penis, probably from Old
Polish smok grass snake, dragon, and likely not the same word as German Schmuck jewelry, adornments,
which is related to Low German smuck supple, tidy, trim, elegant, and to Old Norse smjuga slip, step
through (see smock).    In Jewish homes, the word was regarded as so vulgar as to be taboo [Leo
Rosten, The Joys of Yiddish, 1968] and Lenny Bruce wrote that saying it on stage got him arrested on
the West Coast by a Yiddish undercover agent who had been placed in the club several nights running
to determine if my use of Yiddish terms was a cover for profanity. Euphemized as schmoe, which was
the source of Al Capp's cartoon strip creature the shmoo.    [A]dditional associative effects from
German schmuck 'jewels, decoration' cannot be excluded (cross-linguistically commonplace slang: cf.
Eng. 'family jewels') [Mark R.V. Southern, Contagious Couplings: Transmission of Expressives in
Yiddish Echo Phrases, 2005]. But the English phrase refers to the testicles and is a play on words,
the family element being the essential ones. Words for decoration seem not to be among the
productive sources of European penis slang terms.


