supplant (v.)

early 14c., to trip up, overthrow, defeat, dispossess, from Old French suplanter, sosplanter to trip
up, overthrow, drive out, usurp, or directly from Latin supplantare trip up, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + planta sole of the foot (see plant (n.)). Meaning replace one thing with another
first recorded 1670s. There is a sense evolution parallel in Hebrew akabh he beguiled, from akebh
heel.


mah-jongg (n.)

1922, from dialectal Chinese (Shanghai) ma chiang, name of the game, literally sparrows, from ma
hemp + chiang little birds. The game so called from the design of the pieces. It had a vogue in
Europe and the U.S. in the 1920s and for a time threatened to supplant bridge in popularity.


podiatry (n.)

1914, formed from Greek pod-, stem of pous foot (see foot (n.)) + iatreia healing, from iatros
physician (see -iatric). An attempt to supplant chiropody (see chiropodist) and distance the
practice from the popular impression of unskilled corn-cutters. The National Association of
Chiropodists changed its name to American Podiatry Association in 1958. Related: Podiatric;
podiatrist.


chart (n.)

1570s, map for the use of navigators, from Middle French charte card, map, from Late Latin charta
paper, card, map (see card (n.1)).   Charte is the original form of the French word in all senses,
but after 14c. (perhaps by influence of Italian cognate carta), carte began to supplant it. English
used both carte and card 15c.-17c. for chart, map, and in 17c. chart could mean playing card, but
the words have gone their separate ways and chart has predominated since in the map sense. In the
music score sense from 1957.


load (n.)

that which is laid upon a person or beast, burden, c.1200, from Old English lad way, course,
carrying, from Proto-Germanic *laitho (cognates: Old High German leita, German leite, Old Norse
lei&eth; way, course); related to Old English l&aelig;dan to guide, from PIE *leit- to go forth (see
lead (v.)). Sense shifted 13c. to supplant words based on lade, to which it is not etymologically
connected; original association with guide is preserved in lodestone. Meaning amount customarily
loaded at one time is from c.1300.    Figurative sense of burden weighing on the mind, heart, or
soul is first attested 1590s. Meaning amount of work is from 1946. Colloquial loads lots, heaps is
attested from c.1600. Phrase take a load off (one's) feet sit down, relax is from 1914, American
English. Get a load of take a look at is American English colloquial, attested from 1929.


