surly (adj.)

1570s, haughty, imperious, alteration of Middle English sirly lordly, imperious (14c.), literally
like a sir, from sir + -ly (1). The meaning rude, gruff is first attested 1660s. For sense
development, compare lordly, and German herrisch domineering, imperious, from Herr master, lord.
Related: Surliness.


grump (n.)

ill-humor, 1727, in humps and grumps surly remarks, later the grumps a fit of ill-humor (1844), then
a person in ill humor (1900); perhaps an extended sense of grum morose, surly, which probably is
related to Danish grum cruel; or perhaps suggested by grumble, grunt, etc.


bearish (adj.)

grumpy, surly, 1744, from bear (n.) + -ish. Related: Bearishly; bearishness.


gruff (adj.)

1530s, coarse, coarse-grained, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grof coarse (in quality),
thick, large, of uncertain origin, regarded by some as related to Old English hreof, Old Norse
hrjufr rough, scabby, with Germanic completive prefix ga-. Sense of rough, surly recorded by 1690s.
Related: Gruffness.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


