surmountable (adj.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French sormuntable; see surmount + -able.


surmount (v.)

early 14c., to rise above, go beyond, from Old French surmonter rise above, from sur- beyond  (see
sur- (1)) + monter to go up (see mount (v.)). Meaning to prevail over, overcome is recorded from
late 14c. Related: Surmounted; surmounting.


transcend (v.)

mid-14c., escape inclusion in; lie beyond the scope of, from Old French transcendre transcend,
surpass, and directly from Latin transcendere climb over or beyond, surmount, overstep, from trans-
beyond (see trans-) + scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Meanings be surpassing, outdo, excel;
surmount, move beyond are from early 15c. Related: Transcended; transcending.


insurmountable (adj.)

1690s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + surmountable (see surmount). Related: Insurmountably.


superable (adj.)

surmountable, 1620s, from Latin superabilis that may be overcome, from superare to overcome,
surmount, go over, rise above, from super over (see super-) + -abilis (see -able). The negative
formation insuperable is older and more common and superable may be a back-formation from it.


overcome (v.)

Old English ofercuman to reach, overtake, also to conquer, prevail over, from ofer (see over) +
cuman to come (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High German
ubarqueman, German &uuml;berkommen). In reference to mental or chemical force, to overwhelm, render
helpless, it is in late Old English. Meaning to surmount (a difficulty or obstacle) is from c.1200.
The Civil Rights anthem We Shall Overcome was put together c.1950s from lyrics from Charles
Tindley's spiritual I'll Overcome Some Day (1901), and melody from pre-Civil War spiritual No More
Auction Block for Me. Related: Overcame; overcoming.


make (v.)

Old English macian to make, form, construct, do; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform,
from West Germanic *makon to fashion, fit (cognates: Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia to build,
make, Middle Dutch and Dutch maken, Old High German mahhon to construct, make, German machen to
make), from PIE *mag- to knead, mix; to fashion, fit (see macerate). If so, sense evolution perhaps
is via prehistoric houses built of mud. Gradually replaced the main Old English word, gewyrcan (see
work (v.)).    Meaning to arrive at (a place), first attested 1620s, originally was nautical.
Formerly used in many places where specific verbs now are used, such as to make Latin (c.1500) to
write Latin compositions. This broader usage survives in some phrases, such as to make water to
urinate, to make a book arrange a series of bets (1828), make hay to turn over mown grass to expose
it to sun. Make the grade is 1912, perhaps from the notion of railway engines going up an incline.
Read the valuable suggestions in Dr. C.V. Mosby's book -- be prepared to surmount obstacles before
you encounter them -- equipped with the power to make the grade in life's climb. [advertisement for
Making the Grade, December 1916]    But the phrase also was in use in a schoolwork context at the
time. Make do manage with what is available is attested from 1867. Make time go fast is 1849; make
tracks in this sense is from 1834. To make a federal case out of (something) popularized in 1959
movie Anatomy of a Murder; to make an offer (one) can't refuse is from Mario Puzo's 1969 novel The
Godfather. To make (one's) day is from 1909; menacing make my day is from 1971, popularized by Clint
Eastwood in film Sudden Impact (1983). Related: Made; making.


