surpass (v.)

1550s, from Middle French surpasser go beyond, exceed, excel (16c.), from sur- beyond (see sur- (1))
+ passer to go by (see pass (v.)). Related: Surpassed; surpassing.


exceed (v.)

late 14c., from Old French exceder (14c.) exceed, surpass, go too far, from Latin excedere depart,
go beyond, be in excess, surpass, from ex- out (see ex-) + cedere go, yield (see cede). Related:
Exceeded; exceeding. Exceedingly (late 15c.) means very greatly or very much; excessively (mid-15c.)
means too greatly or too much.


unsurpassed (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of surpass (v.).


outstrip (v.)

1570s, to pass in running, from out + Middle English strip move quickly, of unknown origin.
Figurative sense of to excel or surpass in anything is from 1590s. Related: Outstripped;
outstripping.


outshine (v.)

1590s, from out (adv.) + shine (v.). Perhaps coined by Spenser. Figurative sense of to surpass in
splendor or excellence is from 1610s. Related: Outshone; outshining.


outgrow (v.)

1590s, to surpass in growth, from out + grow (v.). Meaning to become too large or too mature for is
attested from 1660s. Related: Outgrowing; outgrown.


trump (v.1)

surpass, beat, 1580s, from trump (n.). Related: Trumped; trumping.


unsurpassable (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + surpassable (see surpass (v.)).


transcend (v.)

mid-14c., escape inclusion in; lie beyond the scope of, from Old French transcendre transcend,
surpass, and directly from Latin transcendere climb over or beyond, surmount, overstep, from trans-
beyond (see trans-) + scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Meanings be surpassing, outdo, excel;
surmount, move beyond are from early 15c. Related: Transcended; transcending.


excel (v.)

c.1400, from Latin excellere to rise, surpass, be eminent, from ex- out from (see ex-) + -cellere
rise high, tower, related to celsus high, lofty, great, from PIE root *kel- to rise, be elevated
(see hill). Related: Excelled; excelling.


harpy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French harpie (14c.), from Greek Harpyia (plural), literally snatchers, probably
related to harpazein to snatch (see rapid). Metaphoric extension to greedy person is c.1400.    In
Homer they are merely personified storm winds, who were believed to have carried off any person that
had suddenly disappeared. In Hesiod they are fair-haired and winged maidens who surpass the winds in
swiftness, and are called Aello and Ocypete; but in later writers they are represented as disgusting
monsters, with heads like maidens, faces pale with hunger, and claws like those of birds. The
harpies ministered to the gods as the executors of vengeance. [American Cyclop&aelig;dia, 1874]


Pullman (n.)

sleeping car on a passenger train, 1867, Pullman car, in recognition of U.S. inventor George M.
Pullman (1831-1897) of Chicago, who designed a railroad car with folding berths.    The Pullman
Sleeping Car.--The Western World. This splendid specimen of car architecture, being one of a number
of sleeping-cars to be completed   for the Michigan Central road, by Mr. Pullman, has created a
great sensation among railway circles east. ... The car itself is admitted by all who have seen it
to be, in the matter of sleeping and cooking accessories, and superb finish, the ne plus ultra of
perfection. Nothing before has been seen to equal, much less surpass it. [Western Railroad Gazette,
Chicago, quoted in Appleton's Illustrated Railway and Steam Navigation Guide, New York, June, 1867]


surround (v.)

early 15c., to flood, overflow, from Anglo-French surounder, Middle French soronder to overflow,
abound; surpass, dominate, from Late Latin superundare overflow, from Latin super over (see super-)
+ undare to flow in waves, from unda wave (see water (n.1); and compare abound). Sense of to shut in
on all sides first recorded 1610s, influenced by figurative meaning in French of dominate, and by
sound association with round, which also influenced the spelling of the English word from 17c.
Related: Surrounded; surrounding.


move (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French mover, Old French movoir to move, get moving, set out; set in motion;
introduce (Modern French mouvoir), from Latin movere move, set in motion; remove; disturb (past
participle motus, frequentative motare), from PIE root *meue- to push away (cognates: Sanskrit kama-
muta moved by love and probably mivati pushes, moves; Lithuanian mauti push on; Greek ameusasthai to
surpass, amyno push away).    Intransitive sense developed in Old French and came thence to English,
though it now is rare in French. Meaning to affect with emotion is from c.1300; that of to prompt or
impel toward some action is from late 14c. Sense of to change one's place of residence is from 1707.
Meaning to propose (something) in an assembly, etc., is first attested mid-15c.  Related: Moved;
moving.


