susceptible (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin susceptibilis capable, sustainable, susceptible, from Latin suscept-, past
participle stem of suscipere to take, catch, take up, lift up; receive, admit; submit to; sustain,
support, bear; acknowledge, accept, from sub up from under (see sub-) + capere to take (see
capable). Susceptive in the same sense is recorded from early 15c. Related: Susceptibly.


exorable (adj.)

1570s, susceptible of being moved by entreaty (a word much rarer than its opposite and probably used
now only as a back-formation from it), from Latin exorabilis, from exorare to persuade (see
inexorable). Related: Exorably.


susceptive (adj.)

early 15c., having the quality of taking something in, receptive, capable of admitting, from
Medieval Latin susceptivus, from suscept-, stem of suscipere (see susceptible). Related:
Susceptively; susceptiveness; susceptivity.


intussusception (n.)

1707, literally a taking in, from Latin intus within (see ento-) + susceptionem a taking up (see
susceptible).


susceptibility (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin susceptibilitatem (nominative susceptibilitas), from Late Latin
susceptibilis, or else a native formation from susceptible + -ity.


mobile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis movable, easy to move; loose, not
firm, figuratively, pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle,
contraction of *movibilis, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Sociology sense from 1927. Mobile
home first recorded 1940.


horse (v.)

Old English horsian to provide with a horse or horses, from horse (n.). Related: Horsed; horsing.
Sense of to play excessive jokes on is by 1893, mostly in formation horse around (1928), perhaps
from horseplay.    [A] favorite pastime for many men is to horse or guy a friend who has shown
himself susceptible to ridicule or fun making. Horsing is extremely wholesome mental discipline for
over sensitive or super-conceited young men. Horsing always implies a joke at another's expense. As
to how it came into use there is no satisfactory theory to offer. [Yale Literary Magazine, December
1893]


sympathetic (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to sympathy, from Modern Latin sympatheticus, from late Greek sympathetikos having
sympathy, from sympathein, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings (see
sympathy). In English, the meaning having fellow feeling, susceptible to altruistic feelings is
recorded from 1718.    In the anatomical sense, subject to a common nervous influence, the word is
attested from 1769, from Modern Latin (nervus) sympathicus, coined by Jacques-Benigne Winslow
(1669-1760), Danish anatomist living in Paris. Related: Sympathetical (1630s); Sympathetically
(1620s).


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


