suspenders (n.)

straps for holding up trousers, etc., 1806, American English, plural agent noun from suspend (v.).


suspended (adj.)

1530s, temporarily deprived of privilege, past participle adjective from suspend. Meaning delayed is
from 1782, first attested in suspended animation. Meaning hung from something is from 1796. In law,
suspended sentence attested from 1833.


suspend (v.)

c.1300, to bar or exclude temporarily from some function or privilege; also to set aside (a law,
etc.), to cause to cease for a time, from Old French sospendre remove from office; hang up (12c.),
or directly from Latin suspendere to hang up, kill by hanging; make uncertain, render doubtful;
stay, stop, interrupt, set aside temporarily, from assimilated form of sub up from under (see sub-)
+ pendere cause to hang, weigh (see pendant). In English, the literal sense of to cause to hang by a
support from above is recorded from mid-15c. Related: Suspended; suspending.


suspension (n.)

early 15c., a temporary halting or deprivation, from Latin suspensionem (nominative suspensio) the
act or state of hanging up, a vaulting, noun of action, from past participle stem of suspendere to
hang up, cause to hang, suspend (see suspend). Suspension of disbelief is from Coleridge:  A
semblance of truth sufficient to procure for these shadows of imagination that willing suspension of
disbelief for the moment, which constitutes poetic faith. [Biographia Literaria, 1817]    Meaning
action of hanging by a support from above is attested from 1540s. Meaning particles suspended in
liquid without dissolving is from 1707. Suspension-bridge first recorded 1819 (earlier suspended
bridge, 1796).


hang (v.)

a fusion of Old English hon suspend (transitive, class VII strong verb; past tense heng, past
participle hangen), and Old English hangian (weak, intransitive, past tense hangode) be suspended;
also probably influenced by Old Norse hengja suspend, and hanga be suspended. All from Proto-
Germanic *hangen (intransitive) to hang (cognates: Old Frisian hangia, Dutch hangen, German
h&auml;ngen), from PIE *konk- to hang (cognates: Gothic hahan, Hittite gang- to hang, Sanskrit
sankate wavers, Latin cunctari to delay; see also second element in Stonehenge). As a method of
execution, in late Old English (but originally specifically of crucifixion).   Hung emerged as past
participle 16c. in northern England dialect, and hanged endured only in legal language (which tends
to be conservative) and metaphors extended from it (I'll be hanged). Teen slang sense of spend time
first recorded 1951; hang around idle, loiter is from 1830, and hang out (v.) is from 1811. Hang
fire (1781) was originally used of guns that were slow in communicating the fire through the vent to
the charge. To let it all hang out be relaxed and uninhibited is from 1967.


cowardice (n.)

c.1300, from Old French coardise (13c.), from coard, coart (see coward) + noun suffix -ise.
Cowardice, as distinguished from panic, is almost always simply a lack of ability to suspend the
functioning of the imagination. [Ernest Hemingway, Men at War, 1942]


intermit (v.)

1540s, from Latin intermittere to leave off, omit, suspend, interrupt, neglect, from inter- between
(see inter-) + mittere to send (see mission). Related: Intermitted; intermitting; intermittingly.


override (v.)

Old English oferridan to ride across, from ofer over (see over) + ridan to ride (see ride (v.)).
Originally literal, of cavalry, etc. Figurative meaning to set aside arrogantly is from 1827. The
mechanical sense to suspend automatic operation is attested from 1946. As a noun in this sense from
1946. Related: Overrode; overriding; overridden.


encroach (v.)

early 14c., acquire, get, from Old French encrochier seize, fasten on, hang on (to), cling (to);
hang up, suspend, literally to catch with a hook, from en- in (see en- (1)) + croc hook, from Old
Norse krokr hook (see crook). Meaning seize wrongfully is from c.1400. Sense of trespass is first
recorded 1530s. Related: Encroached; encroaches; encroaching.


reprieve (v.)

1570s, reprive, take back to prison, alteration (perhaps by influence of reprove) of Middle English
repryen to remand, detain (late 15c.), probably from Middle French repris, past participle of
reprendre take back (see reprise). Meaning to suspend an impending execution is recorded from 1590s;
this sense evolved because being sent back to prison was the alternative to being executed. Spelling
with -ie- is from 1640s, perhaps by analogy of achieve, etc. Related: Reprieved; reprieving.


pending (prep.)

1640s, during, in the process of, preposition formed from root of French pendant during, literally
hanging, present participle of pendere to hang, to suspend (see pendant). Meaning patterned on a
secondary sense of Latin pendente not decided, literally hanging, in legal phrase pendente lite
while the suit is pending. Use of the present participle before nouns caused it to be regarded as a
preposition. As an adjective from 1797.


suspense (n.)

c.1400, abeyance, temporary cessation; state of not being carried out (of legal matters), from
Anglo-French suspens (in en suspens in abeyance, c.1300), Old French sospense delay, deferment (of
judgement), act of suspending, from Latin suspensus, past participle of suspendere to hang up;
interrupt (see suspend). Meaning state of mental uncertainty with more or less anxiety (mid-15c.) is
from legal meaning, perhaps via notion of awaiting an expected decision, or from state of having the
mind or thoughts suspended. As a genre of novels, stories, etc., attested from 1951.


