sustainable (adj.)

1610s, bearable, from sustain + -able. Attested from 1845 in the sense defensible; from 1965 with
the meaning capable of being continued at a certain level.  Sustainable growth is recorded from
1965. Related: Sustainably.


sustain (v.)

c.1300, give support to, from stem of Old French sostenir hold up, bear; suffer, endure (13c.), from
Latin sustinere hold up, hold upright; furnish with means of support; bear, undergo, endure, from
sub up from below (see sub-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning continue, keep up (an action,
etc.) is from early 14c. Sense of endure without failing or yielding is from c.1400. Related:
Sustained; sustaining.


souteneur (n.)

man who lives on the earnings of one or more prostitutes under his protection, pimp, 1906, French,
literally protector, from soutenir to sustain (see sustain).


self-sustaining (adj.)

1806, from self- + present participle of sustain (v.).


buoy (v.)

late 16c., to mark with a buoy, from buoy (n.). Meaning rise up, lift, sustain is from c.1600,
perhaps influenced by Spanish boyar to float, ultimately from the same source. In the figurative
sense (of hopes, spirits, etc.) it is recorded from 1640s. Related: Buoyed; buoying.


uphold (v.)

c.1200, support, sustain, from up (adv.) + hold (v.). Similar formation in Old Frisian upholda,
Middle Dutch ophouden, German aufhalten. Meaning maintain in good condition or repair is from 1570s.
Related: Upheld; upholding.


stay (v.2)

support, sustain, early 15c., from Middle French estayer (Modern French &#233;tayer), originally in
nautical use, secure by stays, from estaie (see stay (n.1)). The nautical sense in English is from
1620s. Related: Stayed; staying.


sustentation (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French, Old French sustentacion, sostentacion sustaining of life, from Latin
sustentationem (nominative sustentatio) maintenance, noun of action from past participle stem of
sustentare hold upright, hold up; feed, nourish, support; hold out, endure, suffer, frequentative of
sustinere (see sustain).


sustenance (n.)

c.1300, means of living, subsistence, livelihood, from Old French sostenance support, aid (Modern
French soutenance), from Late Latin sustinentia endurance, from present participle stem of Latin
sustinere (see sustain). Meaning action of sustaining life by food is from late 14c. Sense of
nourishment is recorded from late 15c. Related: Sustenant.


support (v.)

late 14c., to aid, also to hold up, prop up, put up with, tolerate, from Old French suporter to
bear, endure, sustain, support (14c.), from Latin supportare convey, carry, bring up, bring forward,
from sub up from under (see sub-) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related: Supported;
supporting.


susceptible (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin susceptibilis capable, sustainable, susceptible, from Latin suscept-, past
participle stem of suscipere to take, catch, take up, lift up; receive, admit; submit to; sustain,
support, bear; acknowledge, accept, from sub up from under (see sub-) + capere to take (see
capable). Susceptive in the same sense is recorded from early 15c. Related: Susceptibly.


feed (v.)

Old English fedan nourish, feed, sustain, foster, from Proto-Germanic *fodjan (cognates: Old Saxon
fodjan, Old Frisian feda, Dutch voeden, Old High German fuotan, Old Norse foe&eth;a, Gothic fodjan
to feed), from PIE *pa- to protect, feed (see food). Feeding frenzy is from 1989, metaphoric
extension of a phrase that had been used of sharks since 1950s.


maintain (v.)

mid-13c., to practice habitually, from Anglo-French meintenir (Old French maintenir, 12c.) keep (a
wife), sustain; persevere in, practice continually, from Latin manu tenere hold in the hand, from
manu, ablative of manus hand (see manual) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning to carry on, keep up
is from mid-14c.; that of to keep oneself, to support is from late 14c. Sense of to defend in speech
is from mid-14c. Related: Maintained; maintaining; maintains.


bear (v.)

Old English beran to bear, bring; bring forth, produce; to endure, sustain; to wear (class IV strong
verb; past tense b&aelig;r, past participle boren), from Proto-Germanic *beran (cognates: Old Saxon
beran, Old Frisian bera, Old High German beran, German geb&auml;ren, Old Norse bera, Gothic bairan
to carry, bear, give birth to), from PIE root *bher- (1) meaning both give birth (though only
English and German strongly retain this sense, and Russian has beremennaya pregnant) and carry a
burden, bring (see infer).   Ball bearings bear the friction. Many senses are from notion of move
onward by pressure. Old English past tense b&aelig;r became Middle English bare; alternative bore
began to appear c.1400, but bare remained the literary form till after 1600. Past participle
distinction of borne for carried and born for given birth is from late 18c. To bear (something) in
mind is from 1530s.


weigh (v.)

Old English wegan (class V strong verb, past tense w&#230;g, past participle w&#230;gon) find the
weight of, measure; have weight; lift, carry, support, sustain, bear; move, from Proto-Germanic
*wegan (cognates: Old Saxon wegan, Old Frisian wega, Dutch wegen to weigh, Old Norse vega, Old High
German wegan to move, carry, weigh, German wiegen to weigh), from PIE *wegh- to move (cognates:
Sanskrit vahati carries, conveys, vahitram vessel, ship; Avestan vazaiti he leads, draws; Greek
okhos carriage; Latin vehere to carry, convey; Old Church Slavonic vesti to carry, convey;
Lithuanian ve&#382;u to carry, convey; Old Irish fecht campaign, journey).    The original sense was
of motion, which led to that of lifting, then to that of measure the weight of. The older sense of
lift, carry survives in the nautical phrase weigh anchor. Figurative sense of to consider, ponder
(in reference to words, etc.) is recorded from mid-14c. To weigh in in the literal sense is from
1868, originally of jockeys; figurative meaning bring one's influence to bear is from 1909.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


