swaggerer (n.)

1590s, agent noun from swagger (v.).


swagger (v.)

1580s, to strut in a defiant or insolent manner; earliest recorded usages are in Shakespeare
(Midsummer Night's Dream, 2 Henry IV, King Lear), probably a frequentative form of swag (v.) to
sway. Meaning to boast or brag is from 1590s. Related: Swaggered; swaggering. The noun is attested
from 1725.


cock (v.)

mid-12c., cocken, to fight; 1570s, to swagger; seeming contradictory modern senses of to stand up
(as in cock one's ear), c.1600, and to bend (1898) are from the two cock nouns. The first is
probably in reference to the posture of the bird's head or tail, the second to the firearm position.
To cock ones hat carries the notion of defiant boastfulness.


panache (n.)

1550s, a tuft or plume of feathers, from Middle French pennache tuft of feathers, from Italian
pennaccio, from Late Latin pinnaculum small wing, gable, peak (see pinnacle). Figurative sense of
display, swagger first recorded 1898 (in translation of Cyrano de Bergerac), from French.


jet (v.)

early 15c., to prance, strut, swagger, from Middle French jeter to throw, thrust, from Late Latin
iectare, abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc., in place of Latin iactare toss about,
frequentative of iacere to throw, cast, from PIE root *ye- to do (cognates: Greek iemi, ienai to
send, throw; Hittite ijami I make). Meaning to sprout or spurt forth is from 1690s. Related: Jetted;
jetting.


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


grand (adj.)

late 14c., grant large, big (early 12c. in surnames), from Anglo-French graunt and directly from Old
French grant, grand (10c.) large, tall; grown-up; great, powerful, important; strict, severe;
extensive; numerous, from Latin grandis big, great; full, abundant, also full-grown; figuratively
strong, powerful, weighty, severe (perhaps cognate with Greek brenthyomai to swagger, be haughty).
It supplanted magnus in Romanic languages; in English with a special sense of imposing. The
connotations of noble, sublime, lofty, dignified, etc., were in Latin. As a general term of
admiration, magnificent, splendid, from 1816. Related: Grander; grandest.    The use of grand- in
compounds, with the sense of a generation older than, or younger than, is first attested c.1200, in
Anglo-French graund dame grandmother. Latin and Greek had similar usages.   Grand jury is late 15c.
Grand piano from 1797. The grand tour of the principal sites of continental Europe, as part of a
gentleman's education, is attested by that name from 1660s. The Grand Canyon was so called 1871 by
Maj. John Wesley Powell, scientific adventurer, who explored it; earlier it had been known as Big
Canyon.


