swarm (n.)

cloud of bees or other insects, Old English swearm swarm, multitude, from Proto-Germanic *swarmaz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Middle Low German swarm, Danish sv&#230;rm a swarm, Swedish sv&auml;rm, Middle
Dutch swerm, Old High German swaram, German Schwarm swarm; Old Norse svarmr tumult), by Watkins,
etc., derived from PIE imitative root *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (see susurration) on notion of
humming sound, and thus probably originally of bees. But OED suggests possible connection with base
of swerve and ground sense of agitated, confused, or deflected motion. General sense large, dense
throng is from early 15c.


swarm (v.2)

to leave a hive to start another, also to gather in a swarm, crowd, or throng, late 14c., from swarm
(n.). Compare Dutch zwermen, German schw&#228;rmen, Danish sv&#230;rme. Related: Swarmed; swarming.


swarm (v.1)

to climb (a tree, pole, etc.) by clasping with the arms and legs alternately, to shin, 1540s, of
uncertain origin. Perh. orig. a sailor's word borrowed from the Continent, but no trace of the
meaning has been discovered for phonetically corresponding words [OED]. perhaps originally a
sailors' word, of uncertain origin. Also recorded as swarve (16c.) and in Northern dialects swarble,
swarmle. Related: Swarmed; swarming.


teem (v.1)

abound, swarm, be prolific, Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) beget, give birth to,
bring forth, produce, propagate, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE *deuk- to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of family, brood of
young animals. The meaning abound, swarm is first recorded 1590s, on the notion of be full of as if
ready to give birth. Related: Teemed; teeming.


squirm (v.)

1690s, originally referring to eels, of unknown origin; sometimes associated with worm or swarm, but
perhaps imitative. Figurative sense to be painfully affected, to writhe inside is from 1804.
Related: Squirmed; squirming. As a noun from 1839.


infest (v.)

late 15c., to attack, assail, hurt, distress, annoy, from Middle French infester, from Latin
infestare to attack, disturb, trouble, from infestus hostile, dangerous, originally inexorable, not
able to be handled, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + -festus (able to be) seized. Sense of
swarm over in large numbers first recorded c.1600. Related: Infested; infesting.


congregate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin congregatus flocking together, past participle of congregare to herd together,
collect in a flock, swarm; assemble, from com- together (see com-) + gregare to collect into a
flock, gather, from grex (genitive gregis) a flock (see gregarious). Related: Congregated;
congregating.


susurration (n.)

a whispering, a murmur, c.1400, from Latin susurrationem (nominative susurratio), from past
participle stem of susurrare to hum, murmur, from susurrus a murmur, whisper, a reduplication of the
PIE imitative base *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (cognates: Sanskrit svarati sounds, resounds, Greek
syrinx flute, Latin surdus dull, mute, Old Church Slavonic svirati to whistle, Lithuanian surmo
pipe, shawm, German schwirren to buzz, Old English swearm a swarm).


