sway (n.)

c.1300, movement from side to side, from sway (v.). The meaning controlling influence (as in to be
under the sway of) is from 1510s, from a transitive sense of the verb in Dutch and other languages.


sway-backed (adj.)

1670s, according to OED of Scandinavian origin, perhaps related to obsolete Danish sveibaget. See
sway (v.) + back (n.).


sway (v.)

early 14c., move, go, go quickly; move (something) along, carry, probably from a Scandinavian source
akin to Old Norse sveigja to bend, swing, give way, Old Danish svegja, perhaps merged with an
unrecorded Old English cognate. The whole group might be related to swag (v.) and swing (v.).    The
sense of swing, waver, move in a swaying or sweeping motion is from late 14c. Meaning move from side
to side is from c.1500; transitive sense cause to move from side to side is from 1550s (according to
OED, not common before 19c.). Figurative sense cause to be directed toward one side, prejudice is
from 1590s. Related: Swayed; swaying.


vacillate (v.)

1590s, to sway unsteadily, from Latin vacillatus, past participle of vacillare sway to and fro;
hesitate (see vacillation). Meaning to waver between two opinions or courses is recorded from 1620s.
Related: Vacillated; vacillates; vacillating.


rock (v.1)

to sway, late Old English roccian move a child gently to and fro, related to Old Norse rykkja to
pull, tear, move, Swedish rycka to pull, pluck, Middle Dutch rucken, Old High German rucchan, German
r&uuml;cken to move jerkily.    Meaning cause to sway back and forth is from late 13c. Intransitive
sense from late 14c. For popular music senses, see rock (v.2). Related: Rocked; rocking. To rock the
boat in the figurative sense stir up trouble is from 1914. Rock-a-bye first recorded 1805 in nursery
rhyme.


Rasputin

acquired name (Russian, literally debauchee) of Grigory Yefimovich Novykh (c.1872-1916), mystic and
faith healer who held sway over court of Nicholas II of Russia. His nickname is from his doctrine of
rebirth through sin, that true holy communion must be preceded by immersion in sin. His name used
figuratively in English from 1937 for anyone felt to have an insidious and corrupting influence.


unswayed (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of sway (v.).


reel (v.1)

to whirl around, late 14c., also sway, swing, rock, become unsteady (late 14c.), stagger as a result
of a blow, etc. (c.1400), probably from reel (n.1), on notion of spinning. Of the mind, from 1796.
Related: Reeled; reeling.


swagger (v.)

1580s, to strut in a defiant or insolent manner; earliest recorded usages are in Shakespeare
(Midsummer Night's Dream, 2 Henry IV, King Lear), probably a frequentative form of swag (v.) to
sway. Meaning to boast or brag is from 1590s. Related: Swaggered; swaggering. The noun is attested
from 1725.


vacillation (n.)

c.1400, hesitation, uncertainty, from Latin vacillationem (nominative vacillatio) a reeling,
wavering, noun of action from past participle stem of vacillare sway to and fro, waver, hesitate, be
untrustworthy, of uncertain origin. Originally in reference to opinion or conduct; literal sense is
recorded from 1630s.


swag (v.)

to move heavily or unsteadily, 1520s, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse sveggja
to swing, sway, from the same source as Old English swingan to swing (see swing (v.)). Related:
Swagged; swagging.


-cracy

word-forming element forming nouns meaning rule or government by, from French -cratie or directly
from Medieval Latin -cratia, from Greek -kratia power, might; rule, sway; power over; a power,
authority, from kratos strength, from PIE *kre-tes- power, strength, suffixed form of root
*kar-/*ker- hard (see hard). The connective -o- has come to be viewed as part of it. Productive in
English from c.1800.


dromedary (n.)

late 13c., from Old French dromedaire, from Late Latin dromedarius kind of camel, from Latin dromas
(genitive dromados), from Greek dromas kamelos running camel, from dromos a race course, from PIE
*drem-, from possible base *der- to run, walk, step (cognates: Sanskrit dramati runs, goes, Greek
dromas running, Middle High German tremen to rock, shake, sway). One-humped Arabian camels were bred
and trained for riding. An early variant was drumbledairy (1560s).


vogue (n.)

1570s, the vogue, height of popularity or accepted fashion, from Middle French vogue fashion,
success; also drift, swaying motion (of a boat) literally a rowing, from Old French voguer to row,
sway, set sail (15c.), probably from a Germanic source. Compare Old High German wagon to float,
fluctuate, literally to balance oneself; German Wege wave, billow, wogen fluctuate, float (see
weigh).    Perhaps the notion is of being borne along on the waves of fashion. Italian voga a
rowing, Spanish boga rowing, but colloquially fashion, reputation also probably are from the same
Germanic source. Phrase in vogue having a prominent place in popular fashion first recorded 1643.
The fashion magazine began publication in 1892.


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


