swear (v.)

Old English swerian take an oath (class VI strong verb; past tense swor, past participle sworen),
from Proto-Germanic *swarjan-, (cognates: Old Saxon swerian, Old Frisian swera, Old Norse sverja,
Danish sverge, Middle Dutch swaren, Old High German swerien, German schw&ouml;ren, Gothic swaren to
swear), from PIE root *swer- (1) to speak, talk, say (cognates: Old Church Slavonic svara quarrel,
Oscan sverrunei to the speaker).    Also related to the second element in answer. The secondary
sense of use bad language (early 15c.) developed from the notion of invoke sacred names. Swear off
desist as with a vow is from 1898. Swear in install in office by administration of an oath is from
1700 in modern use, echoing Old English.


swear-word (n.)

1873, American English colloquial, from swear (v.) + word (n.).


swearing (n.)

utterance of profane language, mid-14c., verbal noun from swear (v.).


forswear (v.)

Old English forswerian swear falsely, also abandon or renounce on oath, from for- completely +
swerian to swear. Related: Forswore; forsworn; forswearing.


perjure (v.)

mid-15c. swear falsely (implied in perjured; late 13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French parjurer to
break one's word, renege on a promise (11c.), from Latin periurare to swear falsely, break one's
oath (see perjury). Reflexive sense is from 18c.


conjure (v.)

late 13c., command on oath, from Old French conjurer invoke, conjure (12c.), from Latin coniurare to
swear together; conspire, from com- together (see com-) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)). Magical
sense is c.1300, for constraining by spell a demon to do one's bidding. Related: Conjured;
conjuring. Phrase conjure up cause to appear in the mind (as if by magic) attested from 1580s.


perjury (n.)

late 14c., act of swearing to a statement known to be false, via Anglo-French perjurie (late 13c.)
and Old French parjur&#233;e perjury, false witness, both from Latin periurium a false oath, from
periurare swear falsely, from per- away, entirely (see per) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)).
Related: Perjurious.


adjure (v.)

late 14c., to bind by oath; to question under oath, from Latin adiurare confirm by oath, add an
oath, to swear to in addition, in Late Latin to put (someone) to an oath, from ad- to (see ad-) +
iurare swear, from ius (genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Related: Adjured; adjuring.


answer (n.)

Old English andswaru an answer, a reply, from and- against (see ante) + -swaru affirmation, from
swerian to swear (see swear), suggesting an original sense of make a sworn statement rebutting a
charge. A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon antswor, Old Norse andsvar, Old Frisian
ondser, Danish and Swedish ansvar), implying a Proto-Germanic *andswara-. Meaning a reply to a
question, the main modern sense, was present in Old English. Meaning solution of a problem is from
c.1300.


sworn

past participle of swear; sworn enemies, those who have taken a vow of mutual hatred, is from
c.1600.


jurat (n.)

one who has taken an oath, early 15c. (mid-14c. in Anglo-French), from Medieval Latin iuratus,
literally sworn man, noun use of past participle of iurare to swear (see jury (n.)).


sware

obsolete or archaic past tense of swear (v.), common 15c.-17c. by analogy of past tense of bear
(v.).


criminy (interj.)

also crimine, 1680s; it looks like Italian crimine crime but likely is simply another euphemism for
Christ as a swear-word.


curse (v.)

Old English cursian, from the source of curse (n.). Meaning to swear profanely is from early 13c.
Related: Cursed; cursing.


over-

word-forming element meaning above; highest; across; too much; above normal; outer, from Old English
ofer (see over). Over and its Germanic relations were widely used as prefixes, and sometimes could
be used with negative force. This is rare in Modern English, but compare Gothic ufarmunnon to
forget, ufar-swaran to swear falsely; Old English ofercr&#230;ft fraud.


exorcism (n.)

early 15c., a calling up or driving out of evil spirits, from Late Latin exorcismus, from Greek
exorkismos, from exorkizein exorcize, bind by oath, from ex out of (see ex-) + horkizein cause to
swear, from horkos oath. Earlier in the same sense was exorcization (late 14c.).


rep

1705 as abbreviation of reputation (n.); upon rep I swear it was a common 18c. slang asseveration.
As a shortening of repetition (n.) it is recorded from 1864, originally school slang; as a
shortening of representative (n.), especially sales representative, it is attested from 1896. As an
abbreviation of repertory (company) it is recorded from 1925.


juror (n.)

c.1300 (attested from late 12c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French jurour (late 13c.; Old French
jureor), from Latin iuratorem (nominative iurator) swearer, agent noun from iurare to swear (see
jury (n.)).


abjure (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French abjurer or directly from Latin abiurare deny on oath, from ab- away
(see ab-) + iurare to swear, related to ius (genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Related: Abjured;
abjuring.


galvanize (v.)

1802, from French galvaniser, from galvanisme (see galvanism). Figurative sense of excite, stimulate
(as if by electricity) first recorded 1853. Meaning to coat with metal by means of galvanic
electricity (especially to plate iron with tin, but now typically to plate it with zinc) is from
1839.He'll swear that in her dancing she cuts all others out,Though like a Gal that's galvanized,
she throws her legs about.[Thomas Hood, Love has not Eyes, 1845]  Related: Galvanized; galvanizing.


jury (n.)

early 14c. (attested from late 12c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French juree (late 13c.), from
Medieval Latin iurata an oath, an inquest, fem. past participle of Latin iurare to swear, from ius
(genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Meaning body of persons chosen to award prizes at an exhibition
is from 1851. Grand jury attested from early 15c. in Anglo-French (le graund Jurre).


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


chestnut (n.)

1560s, from chesten nut (1510s), with superfluous nut (n.) + Middle English chasteine, from Old
French chastain (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;taigne), from Latin castanea chestnut, chestnut tree,
from Greek kastaneia, which the Greeks thought meant either nut from Castanea in Pontus, or nut from
Castana in Thessaly, but probably both places are named for the trees, not the other way around, and
the word is borrowed from a language of Asia Minor (compare Armenian kask chestnut, kaskeni chestnut
tree). In reference to the dark reddish-brown color, 1650s. Applied to the horse-chestnut by 1832.
Slang sense of venerable joke or story is from 1885, explained 1888 by Joseph Jefferson (see
Lippincott's Monthly Magazine, January 1888) as probably abstracted from the 1816 melodrama The
Broken Sword by William Dimond where an oft-repeated story involving a chestnut tree figures in an
exchange between the characters Captain Zavior and Pablo:   Zav. Let me see--ay! it is exactly six
years since that peace being restored to Spain, and my ship paid off, my kind brother offered me a
snug hammock in the dwelling of my forefathers. I mounted a mule at Barcelona and trotted away for
my native mountains. At the dawn of the fourth day's journey, I entered the wood of Collares, when,
suddenly, from the thick boughs of a cork-tree--   Pab. [Jumping up.] A chesnut, Captain, a chesnut!
Zav. Bah, you booby! I say, a cork!   Pab. And I swear, a chesnut. Captain, this is the twenty-
seventh time 1 have heard you relate this story, and you invariably said, a chesnut, till now.
Jefferson traced the connection through William Warren, the veteran comedian of Boston who often
played Pablo in the melodrama.


bloody (adj.)

Old Engish blodig, adjective from blod (see blood). Common Germanic, compare Old Frisian blodich,
Old Saxon bl&#244;dag, Dutch bloedig, Old High German bluotag, German blutig.    It has been a
British intensive swear word since at least 1676. Weekley relates it to the purely intensive use of
the cognate Dutch bloed, German Blut. But perhaps it ultimately is connected with bloods in the
slang sense of rowdy young aristocrats (see blood (n.)) via expressions such as bloody drunk as
drunk as a blood.    Partridge reports that it was respectable before c.1750, and it was used by
Fielding and Swift, but heavily tabooed c.1750-c.1920, perhaps from imagined association with
menstruation; Johnson calls it very vulgar, and OED writes of it, now constantly in the mouths of
the lowest classes, but by respectable people considered 'a horrid word', on par with obscene or
profane language.    The onset of the taboo against bloody coincides with the increase in linguistic
prudery that presaged the Victorian Era but it is hard to say what the precise cause was in the case
of this specific word. Attempts have been made to explain the term's extraordinary shock power by
invoking etymology. Theories that derive it from such oaths as By our Lady or God's blood seem
farfetched, however. More likely, the taboo stemmed from the fear that many people have of blood
and, in the minds of some, from an association with menstrual bleeding. Whatever, the term was
debarred from polite society during the whole of the nineteenth century. [Rawson]    Shaw shocked
theatergoers when he put it in the mouth of Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion (1914), and for a time the
word was known euphemistically as the Shavian adjective. It was avoided in print as late as 1936.
Bloody Sunday, Jan. 30, 1972, when 13 civilians were killed by British troops at protest in
Londonderry, Northern Ireland.


