swelter (n.)

a sweltering condition, 1851, from swelter (v.).


sweltering (adj.)

oppressively hot (of weather, seasons), 1590s, present participle adjective from swelter (v.).
Related: Swelteringly.


swelter (v.)

c.1400, faint with heat, frequentative of swelten be faint (especially with heat), late 14c., from
Old English sweltan to die, perish, from Proto-Germanic *swiltan- (cognates: Old Saxon sweltan to
die, Old Norse svelta to put to death, starve, Gothic sviltan to die), perhaps originally to burn
slowly, hence to be overcome with heat or fever, from PIE root *swel- (2) to shine, beam (see
Selene). From the same ancient root comes Old English swelan to burn. For specialization of words
meaning to die, compare starve. Related: Sweltered; sweltering.


sultry (adj.)

1590s, oppressively hot, close and moist (of weather), ultimately from swelter + alteration of -y
(2), either as a contraction of sweltry or from obsolete verb sulter to swelter (1580s), alteration
of swelter. Figurative sense of hot with lust is attested from 1704; of women, lascivious, sensual,
arousing desire it is recorded from 1940. Related: Sultriness.


sweltry (adj.)

1570s, for *sweltery, from swelter (v.) + -y (2).


Selene

moon goddess, equivalent of Latin Luna, from Greek selene the moon; name of the moon goddess,
related to selas light, brightness, bright flame, flash of an eye, from PIE root *swel- (2) to
shine, beam (cognates: Sanskrit svargah heaven, Lithuanian svilti to singe, Old English swelan to be
burnt up, Middle Low German swelan to smolder); related to swelter, sultry. Related: Selenian of or
pertaining to the moon as a world, 1660s.


die (v.)

mid-12c., possibly from Old Danish d&oslash;ja or Old Norse deyja to die, pass away, both from
Proto-Germanic *dawjan (cognates: Old Frisian deja to kill, Old Saxon doian, Old High German touwen,
Gothic diwans mortal), from PIE root *dheu- (3) to pass away, die, become senseless (cognates: Old
Irish dith end, death, Old Church Slavonic daviti, Russian davit' to choke, suffer).    It has been
speculated that Old English had *diegan, from the same source, but it is not in any of the surviving
texts and the preferred words were steorfan (see starve), sweltan (see swelter), wesan dead, also
for&eth;gan and other euphemisms.    Languages usually don't borrow words from abroad for central
life experiences, but die words are an exception, because they are often hidden or changed
euphemistically out of superstitious dread. A Dutch euphemism translates as to give the pipe to
Maarten. Regularly spelled dege through 15c., and still pronounced dee by some in Lancashire and
Scotland. Used figuratively (of sounds, etc.) from 1580s. Related: Died; dies.


