swell (adj.)

fashionably dressed or equipped, 1810, from swell (n.) in the stylish person sense. As good,
excellent, by 1897; as a stand-alone expression of satisfaction it is recorded from 1930 in American
English.


swell (n.)

c.1200, a morbid swelling, from swell (v.). In reference to a rise of the sea, it is attested from
c.1600; of music, by 1803. The meaning wealthy, elegant person is first recorded 1786, connected to
the now-obsolete sense pompousness, arrogance (1724), both from the notion of puffed-up demeanor or
behavior.


swelling (n.)

tumor, morbid enlargement, Old English; verbal noun from swell (v.).


swell (v.)

Old English swellan grow or make bigger (past tense sweall, past participle swollen), from Proto-
Germanic *swelnan (cognates: Old Saxon swellan, Old Norse svella, Old Frisian swella, Middle Dutch
swellen, Dutch zwellen, Old High German swellan, German schwellen), of unknown origin. Of emotions
from late 14c., of music from 1749. Related: swelled; swollen; swelling.


tumescence (n.)

1725, from French tumescence, from Latin tumescentem (nominative tumescens) swelling, present
participle of tumescere begin to swell, swell up, figuratively grow excited, become enraged,
inceptive of tumere to swell (see tumid) + inchoative suffix -escere.


bloat (v.)

1670s, to cause to swell (earlier, in reference to cured fish, to cause to be soft, 1610s), from now
obsolete bloat (adj.), attested from c.1300 as soft, flabby, flexible, pliable, but by 17c. meaning
puffed up, swollen. Perhaps from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blautr soaked, soft from
being cooked in liquid (compare Swedish bl&#246;t fisk soaked fish), possibly from Proto-Germanic
*blaut-, from PIE *bhleu- to swell, well up, overflow, an extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell (see bole).    Influenced by or combined with Old English blawan blow, puff.
Figurative use by 1711. Intransitive meaning to swell, to become swollen is from 1735. Related:
Bloated; bloating.


edema (n.)

c.1400, from medical Latin, from Greek oidema (genitive oidematos) a swelling tumor, from oidein to
swell, from oidos tumor, swelling, from PIE *oid- to swell (cognates: Latin aemidus swelling,
Armenian aitumn a swelling, Old Norse eista testicle, Old English attor poison (that which makes the
body swell), and the first element in Oedipus).


tumescent (adj.)

1806, from Latin tumescentem (nominative tumescens), present participle of tumescere to begin to
swell, swell up (see tumescence).


blain (n.)

Old English blegen a sore, from Proto-Germanic *blajinon a swelling (cognates: Danish blegn, Dutch
blein), from PIE *bhlei- to swell, from root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell; see bole.


tumid (adj.)

morbidly swollen, 1540s, from Latin tumidus swollen, swelling, rising high, figuratively swollen
with anger or pride, from tumere to swell, from PIE root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh). Figurative
sense in English (in reference to prose, etc.) is attested from 1640s. Related: Tumidity.


cumulus (n.)

1650s, a heap, from Latin cumulus a heap, pile, mass, surplus, from PIE *ku-m-olo-, suffixed
shortened form of root *keue- to swell (compare Sanskrit svayati swells up, is strong, Greek kyein
to swell, Lithuanian &#353;aunas firm, solid, fit, capable). Meteorological use for rounded mass of
clouds first attested 1803.


blister (n.)

c.1300, perhaps via Old French blestre blister, lump, bump, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old
Norse blastr a blowing, dative bl&aelig;stri swelling), or from Middle Dutch blyster swelling;
perhaps from PIE *bhlei- to blow, swell, extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell; see
bole.


surge (n.)

late 15c., fountain, stream, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French sourge-, stem of
sourdre to rise, swell, from Latin surgere to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack,
contraction of surrigere, from assimilated form of sub up from below (see sub-) + regere to keep
straight, guide (see regal). Meaning high, rolling swell of water is from 1520s; figurative sense of
excited rising up (as of feelings) is from 1510s.


pustule (n.)

late 14c., from Old French pustule (13c.) and directly from Latin pustula blister, pimple, from PIE
imitative root *pu- (1)  blow, swell, on notion of inflated area (cognates: Sanskrit pupphusah lung,
Greek physa breath, blast, wind, bubble, Lithuanian puciu to blow, swell, Old Church Slavonic
puchati to blow). Compare emphysema. Related: Pustulant; pustular.


orgasm (n.)

1680s, sexual climax, from French orgasme or Modern Latin orgasmus, from Greek orgasmos excitement,
swelling, from organ be in heat, become ripe for, literally to swell, be excited, related to orge
impulse, excitement, anger, from PIE root *wrog- to burgeon, swell with strength (cognates: Sanskrit
urja a nourishment, sap, vigor, Old Irish ferc, ferg anger). Also used 17c. of other violent
excitements of emotion or other bodily functions.


la-di-da

mocking of affected gentility, 1874, in derisive imitation of swell way of talking.


boast (n.)

mid-13c., arrogance, presumption, pride, vanity; c.1300, a brag, boastful speech, from Anglo-French
bost ostentation, probably via Scandinavian (compare Norwegian baus proud, bold, daring), from
Proto-Germanic *bausia to blow up, puff up, swell (cognates: Middle High German bus swelling,
dialectal German baustern to swell; Middle Dutch bose, Dutch boos evil, wicked, angry, Old High
German bosi worthless, slanderous, German b&ouml;se evil, bad, angry), from PIE *bhou-, variant of
root *beu-, *bheu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2)).    The notion apparently is of being puffed up
with pride; compare Old English belgan to become angry, offend, provoke, belg anger, arrogance, from
the same root as bellows and belly (n.). Related: Boasted; boasting. An Old English word for
boasting was micelsprecende, big talk.


fluent (adj.)

1580s, flowing freely (of water, also of speech), from Latin fluentem (nominative fluens) lax,
relaxed, figuratively flowing, fluent, present participle of fluere to flow, stream, run, melt, from
PIE *bhleugw-, extended form of *bhleu- to swell, well up, overflow (cognates: Latin flumen river;
Greek phluein to boil over, bubble up, phlein to abound), an extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell; see bole. Used interchangeably with fluid in Elizabethan times. Related: Fluently.


pock (n.)

Old English pocc pustule, blister, ulcer, from Proto-Germanic *puh(h)- to swell up, blow up
(cognates: Middle Dutch pocke, Dutch pok, East Frisian pok, Low German poche, dialectal German
Pfoche), from PIE root *beu- to swell, to blow (see bull (n.2)). Middle French pocque is from
Germanic. The plural form, Middle English pokkes, is the source of pox, which since early 14c. has
been used in the sense disease characterized by pocks.


boil (n.)

hard tumor, altered from Middle English bile (Kentish bele), perhaps by association with the verb;
from Old English byl, byle boil, carbuncle, from West Germanic *buljon- swelling (cognates: Old
Frisian bele, Old High German bulia, German Beule). Perhaps ultimately from PIE root *bhel- (2) to
swell (see bole), or from *beu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2); also compare boast (n.)). Compare
Old Irish bolach pustule, Gothic ufbauljan to puff up, Icelandic beyla hump.


halcyon (adj.)

1540s, in halcyon dayes (Latin alcyonei dies, Greek alkyonides hemerai), 14 days of calm weather at
the winter solstice, when a mythical bird (identified with the kingfisher) was said to breed in a
nest floating on calm seas. From halcyon (n.), late 14c., from Latin halcyon, from Greek halkyon,
variant (perhaps a misspelling) of alkyon kingfisher, from hals sea, salt (see halo-) + kyon
conceiving, present participle of kyein to conceive, literally to swell, from PIE root *keue- to
swell. Identified in mythology with Halcyone, daughter of Aeolus, who when widowed threw herself
into the sea and became a kingfisher.


hove (v.2)

to rise up, to swell, 1590s, from heave, perhaps pulled from a past tense form.


bole (n.)

early 14c., from Old Norse bolr tree trunk, from Proto-Germanic *bulas (cognates: Middle Dutch bolle
trunk of a tree), from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (cognates: Greek phyllon leaf, phallos
swollen penis; Latin flos flower, florere to blossom, flourish, folium leaf; Old Prussian balsinis
cushion; Old Norse belgr bag, bellows; Old English bolla pot, cup, bowl; Old Irish bolgaim I swell,
blath blossom, flower, bolach pimple, bolg bag; Breton bolc'h flax pod; Serbian buljiti to stare, be
bug-eyed; Serbo-Croatian blazina pillow).


thigh (n.)

Old English &thorn;eoh, &thorn;eh, from Proto-Germanic *theuham (cognates: Old Frisian thiach, Old
Dutch thio, Dutch dij, Old Norse &thorn;jo, Old High German dioh), probably literally the thick or
fat part of the leg, from PIE *teuk- from root *teue- (2) to swell (cognates: Lithuanian taukas, Old
Church Slavonic tuku, Russian tuku fat of animals; Lithuanian tukti to become fat; Avestan tuma fat;
Greek tylos callus, lump, tymbos burial mound, grave, tomb; Old Irish ton rump; Latin tumere to
swell, tumulus raised heap of earth, tumidus swollen;tumor a swelling; Middle Irish tomm a small
hill, Welsh tom mound).


thumb (n.)

Old English &thorn;uma, from Proto-Germanic *thumon- (cognates: Old Frisian thuma, Old Saxon, Old
High German thumo, German Daumen, Dutch duim thumb, Old Norse &thorn;umall thumb of a glove),
literally the stout or thick (finger), from PIE *tum- swell, from root *teue- (2) to swell (see
thigh). For spelling with -b (attested from late 13c.), see limb.    To be under (someone's) thumb
be totally controlled by that person is recorded from 1580s. Thumbs up (1887) and thumbs down (1906)
were said to be from expressions of approval or the opposite in ancient amphitheaters, especially
gladiator shows, where the gesture decided whether a defeated combatant was spared or slain. But the
Roman gesture was merely one of hiding the thumb in the hand or extending it. Perhaps the modern
gesture is from the usual coachmen's way of greeting while the hands are occupied with the reins.


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


groundswell (n.)

1818, from ground (n.) + swell (n.). Figurative sense is attested from 1817.


blow (v.1)

move air, Old English blawan blow, breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound a wind
instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;-anan (source of Old High German blaen, German bl&auml;hen), from PIE *bhle- to swell,
blow up (source of Latin flare to blow), possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).    Meaning to squander (of money) is from 1874. Sense of depart suddenly is from 1902. Slang
do fellatio on sense is from 1933, as blow (someone) off, originally among prostitutes (compare blow
job). This usage probably is not connected to the colloquial imprecation (1781, associated with
sailors, as in Popeye's well, blow me down!), which has past participle blowed. Meaning to spend
(money) foolishly and all at once is 1890s; that of bungle an opportunity is from 1943. To blow over
pass is from 1610s, originally of storms. To blow (someone's) mind was in use by 1967; there is a
song title Blow Your Mind released in a 1965 Mirawood recording by a group called The Gas Company.


turgid (adj.)

1610s, from Latin turgidus swollen, inflated, distended, from turgere to swell, of unknown origin.
Figurative use in reference to prose is from 1725. Related: Turgidly; turgidness.


belly (n.)

Old English belg, bylg (West Saxon), b&aelig;lg (Anglian) leather bag, purse, bellows, from Proto-
Germanic *balgiz bag (cognates: Old Norse belgr bag, bellows, bylgja billow, Gothic balgs wineskin),
from PIE *bholgh-, from root *bhelgh- to swell, an extension of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Meaning shifted to body (late 13c.), then focused to abdomen (mid-14c.). Meaning bulging part
or concave surface of anything is 1590s. The West Germanic root had a figurative or extended sense
of anger, arrogance (as in Old English bolgenmod enraged; belgan (v.) to become angry).    Indo-
European languages commonly use the same word for both the external belly and the internal (stomach,
womb, etc.), but the distinction of external and internal is somewhat present in English
belly/stomach; Greek gastr- (see gastric) in classical language denoted the paunch or belly, while
modern science uses it only in reference to the stomach as an organ. Fastidious avoidance of belly
in speech and writing (compensated for by stretching the senses of imported stomach and abdomen,
baby-talk tummy and misappropriated midriff) began late 18c. and the word was banished from Bibles
in many early 19c. editions. Belly punch (n.) is attested from 1811.


tumulus (n.)

ancient burial mound, 1680s, from Latin tumulus hillock, heap of earth, mound, related to tumere to
swell (see tumid).


Corinthian

1650s as an architectural order, from Corinth, the ancient Greek city-state. In classical times
Corinth was notorious for its luxury and licentiousness among the Greek states (and for not scorning
trade and profit); hence Corinthian, noun and adjective, in various slang or colloquial sense in
English, especially a swell, a man about town (early to mid-19c. but especially in the 1820s).


tumult (n.)

late 14c., from Old French tumult (12c.), from Latin tumultus commotion, bustle, uproar, disorder,
disturbance, related to tumere to be excited, swell (see tumid).


swollen (adj.)

early 14c., past participle adjective from strong conjugation of swell (v.); from Old English
geswollen, past participle of swellan.


pituitary (adj.)

1610s, from Latin pituitarius mucous, from pituita clammy moisture, phlegm, mucus, slime, possibly
from PIE root *peie- to be fat, swell (see pine (n.)). Taken as the name for the gland because it
was believed that it channeled mucus to the nose. As a noun by 1899.


tumor (n.)

early 15c., from Latin tumor swelling, condition of being swollen, a tumor, from tumere to swell
(see tumid).


bulge (v.)

to protrude, swell out, 1670s, from bulge (n.). Related: Bulged; bulging.


bag (v.)

mid-15c., to swell out like a bag; also to put money in a bag, from bag (n.). Earliest verbal sense
was to be pregnant (c.1400). Of clothes, to hang loosely, 1824. For sense catch, seize, steal, see
bag (n.). Related: Bagged; bagging.


balloon (v.)

to go up in a balloon, 1792; to swell, puff up, 1841, from balloon (n.). Related: Ballooned;
ballooning.


protuberant (adj.)

1640s, from French protub&#233;rant (16c.) and directly from Late Latin protuberantem (moninative
protuberans), present participle of protuberare to swell, bulge out (see protuberance). Related:
Protuberantly.


follicle (n.)

early 15c., from French follicule or directly from Latin folliculus little bag, diminutive of follis
bellows, inflated ball, from PIE *bhol-n-, suffixed form of root *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).


tombolo (n.)

sand-bar joining an island to the mainland, 1899, from Italian tombolo sand dune, from Latin tumulus
hillock, mound, heap of earth, from PIE root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh).


tail-pipe (n.)

also tailpipe, 1757, small pipe fixed at the swell of a musket to receive the ramrod, from tail (n.)
+ pipe (n.). From 1832 as suction pipe of a pump; 1907 as exhaust pipe of an automobile.


tuber (n.)

thick underground stem, 1660s, from Latin tuber edible root, truffle; lump, bump, swelling, from PIE
*tubh-, from root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh).


billow (n.)

1550s, perhaps older in dialectal use, from Old Norse bylgja a wave, a billow, from Proto-Germanic
*bulgjan (cognates: Middle High German bulge billow, bag), from PIE *bhelgh- to swell (see belly
(n.)).


turgor (n.)

1857, from medical Latin turgor, from Latin turgere to swell (see turgid).


bollix (v.)

bungle, respelling (perhaps euphemistic) of bollocks, plural of bollock testicle, from Old English
beallucas testicles, from Proto-Germanic *ball-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to inflate, swell (see bole).
Related: Bollixed; bollixing.


belch (v.)

Old English bealcan bring up wind from the stomach, also swell, heave, of echoic origin (cognates:
Dutch balken to bray, shout). Extended to volcanoes, cannons, etc. 1570s. Related: Belched;
belching. As a noun, recorded from 1510s. It is recorded in 1706 as a slang noun meaning poor beer.


pap (n.2)

nipple of a woman's breast, c.1200, first attested in Northern and Midlands writing, probably from a
Scandinavian source (not recorded in Old Norse, but compare dialectal Swedish pappe), from PIE
imitative root *pap- to swell (cognates: Latin papilla nipple, papula a swelling, pimple; Lithuanian
papas nipple).


embryo (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin embryo, from Greek embryon a young one, in Homer, young animal, later,
fruit of the womb, literally that which grows, from en in (see en- (2)) + bryein to swell, be full.


