swerve (n.)

1741, from swerve (v.).


swerve (v.)

c.1200, to depart, go make off; turn away or aside; c.1300, to turn aside, deviate from a straight
course; in form from Old English sweorfan to rub, scour, file away, grind away, but sense
development is difficult to trace. The Old English word is from Proto-Germanic *swerb- (cf Old Norse
sverfa to scour, file, Old Saxon swebran to wipe off), from PIE root *swerbh- to turn; wipe off.
Cognate words in other Germanic languages (cognates: Old Frisian swerva to creep, Middle Dutch
swerven to rove, roam, stray) suggests the sense of go off, turn aside might have existed in Old
English, though unrecorded. Related: Swerved; swerving.


unswerving (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + present participle of swerve (v.).


Ossianic (adj.)

1808, in reference to Oisin, name of a legendary Gaelic bard, literally little fawn; James
Macpherson claimed to have collected and translated his works (1760-1763) under the name Ossian, and
the poetic prose sparked a Celtic revival and fascination with the glamor of the lost world of the
bards. The work turned out to be Macpherson's forgery, and the style later was regarded as
bombastic, but the resulting swerve in European literature was real.


swarf (n.)

grit from a grinding tool, 1560s, perhaps ultimately from Old English geswearf filings, from
sweorfan, or from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse svarf file dust, related to sverfa to
file, from PIE *swerbh- to turn, wipe off (see swerve (v.)). Later used of the material cut out to
make grooves of gramophone records (1935).


gauche (adj.)

awkward, tactless, 1751 (Chesterfield), from French gauche left (15c., replacing Old French senestre
in that sense), originally awkward, awry, from Middle French gauchir turn aside, swerve, from Proto-
Germanic *wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon, Old Norse vakka to stagger, totter), from PIE
*weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).


politics (n.)

1520s, science of government, from politic (adj.), modeled on Aristotle's ta politika affairs of
state, the name of his book on governing and governments, which was in English mid-15c. as
Polettiques. Also see -ics.Politicks is the science of good sense, applied to public affairs, and,
as those are forever changing, what is wisdom to-day would be folly and perhaps, ruin to-morrow.
Politicks is not a science so properly as a business. It cannot have fixed principles, from which a
wise man would never swerve, unless the inconstancy of men's view of interest and the capriciousness
of the tempers could be fixed. [Fisher Ames (1758-1808)]Meaning a person's political allegiances or
opinions is from 1769.


swarm (n.)

cloud of bees or other insects, Old English swearm swarm, multitude, from Proto-Germanic *swarmaz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Middle Low German swarm, Danish sv&#230;rm a swarm, Swedish sv&auml;rm, Middle
Dutch swerm, Old High German swaram, German Schwarm swarm; Old Norse svarmr tumult), by Watkins,
etc., derived from PIE imitative root *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (see susurration) on notion of
humming sound, and thus probably originally of bees. But OED suggests possible connection with base
of swerve and ground sense of agitated, confused, or deflected motion. General sense large, dense
throng is from early 15c.


catawampus (adj.)

also catawampous, cattywampus, catiwampus, etc. (see Dictionary of American Slang for more),
American colloquial. First element perhaps from obsolete cater to set or move diagonally (see catty-
cornered); second element perhaps related to Scottish wampish to wriggle, twist, or swerve about. Or
perhaps simply the sort of jocular pseudo-classical formation popular in the slang of those times,
with the first element suggesting Greek kata-.    Earliest use seems to be in adverbial form,
catawampusly (1834), expressing no certain meaning but adding intensity to the action: utterly,
completely; with avidity, fiercely, eagerly. It appears as a noun from 1843, as a name for an
imaginary hobgoblin or fright, perhaps from influence of catamount. The adjective is attested from
the 1840s as an intensive, but this is only in British lampoons of American speech and might not be
authentic. It was used in the U.S. by 1864 in a sense of askew, awry, wrong and by 1873 (noted as a
peculiarity of North Carolina speech) as in a diagonal position, on a bias, crooked.


