swindler (n.)

1774, from German Schwindler giddy person, extravagant speculator, cheat, from schwindeln to be
giddy, act extravagantly, swindle, from Old High German swintilon be giddy, frequentative form of
swintan to languish, disappear; cognate with Old English swindan, and probably with swima dizziness.
Said to have been introduced in London by German Jews c.1762.


chouse (n.)

swindler, swindle, 1650s, said to be from Turkish chaush sergeant, herald, messenger, but the sense
connection is obscure.


chiseler (n.)

1824, one who works with a chisel, agent noun from chisel (v.). In slang sense of swindler, attested
from 1918.


slick (n.)

1620s, a kind of cosmetic, from slick (v.). Meaning smooth place on the surface of water caused by
oil, etc. is attested from 1849. Meaning a swindler, clever person is attested from 1959.


blackleg (n.)

swindler, especially in equestrian events, 1771, from black (adj.) + leg (n.), but the exact
signification is uncertain.


scam

1963, noun and verb, U.S. slang, a carnival term, of unknown origin. Perhaps related to 19c. British
slang scamp cheater, swindler (see scamp (n.)).


cheat (n.)

late 14c., forfeited property, from cheat (v.). Meaning a deceptive act is from 1640s; earlier, in
thieves' jargon, it meant a stolen thing (late 16c.), and earlier still dice (1530s). Meaning a
swindler is from 1660s.


swindle (v.)

1782, back-formation from swindler cheater. Related: Swindled; swindling. As a noun, act of
swindling, from 1833.


sharper (n.)

1560s, one who makes sharp, agent noun from obsolete verb sharp to make sharp (see sharp (adj.)).
Meaning swindler is from 1680s, probably a variant of sharker (see shark (n.)). Shortened form
sharpie is from 1942, also probably involving the sharply dressed sense of the adjective.


crook (n.)

early 13c., hook-shaped instrument or weapon, from Old Norse krokr hook, corner, cognate with Old
High German kracho hooked tool, of obscure origin but perhaps related to a widespread group of
Germanic kr- words meaning bent, hooked. Meaning swindler is American English, 1879, from crooked in
figurative sense of dishonest (1708). Crook dishonest trick was in Middle English.


lubber (n.)

mid-14c., big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness, from lobre, earlier lobi lazy lout,
probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber a plump, lazy fellow). But OED
suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor swindler, parasite, with sense altered by
association with lob (n.) in the bumpkin sense. A sailors' word since 16c. (as in landlubber), but
earliest attested use is of lazy monks (abbey-lubber). Compare also lubberwort, the name of the
mythical herb that produces laziness (1540s); and Lubberland imaginary land of plenty without work
(1590s). Sometimes also Lubbard (1580s).


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


shark (n.)

1560s, of uncertain origin; apparently the word and the first specimen were brought to London by
Capt. John Hawkins's second expedition (landed 1565; see Hakluyt).  There is no proper name for it
that I knowe, but that sertayne men of Captayne Haukinses doth call it a 'sharke' [handbill
advertising an exhibition of the specimen, 1569]    The meaning dishonest person who preys on
others, though attested only from 1599 (sharker artful swindler in this sense is from 1594), may be
the original sense, later transferred to the large, voracious marine fish. If so, it is possibly
from German Schorck, a variant of Schurke scoundrel, villain, agent noun of Middle High German
sch&uuml;rgen (German sch&uuml;ren) to poke, stir.    But on another theory, the English word is
from a Mayan word, xoc, which might have meant shark. Northern Europeans seem not to have been
familiar with sharks before voyages to the tropics began. A slightly earlier name for it in English
was tiburon, via Spanish (where it is attested by 1520s), from the Carib name for the fish.    The
English word was applied (or re-applied) to voracious or predatory persons, on the image of the
fish, from 1707 (originally of pick-pockets); loan shark is attested from 1905. Sharkskin (1851) was
used for binding books, etc. As the name of a type of fabric held to resemble it, it is recorded
from 1932.    There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called by sailors; a grasping,
rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our
steering oar. [Herman Melville, Mardi]


