sycophantic (adj.)

1670s, from Greek sykophantikos, from sykophantes (see sycophant). Related: Sycophantical (1560s).


sycophant (n.)

1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), informer, talebearer, slanderer, from Middle French sycophante and
directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantes false accuser, slanderer, literally one who
shows the fig, from sykon fig (see fig) + phainein to show (see phantasm). Showing the fig was a
vulgar gesture made by sticking the thumb between two fingers, a display which vaguely resembles a
fig, itself symbolic of a vagina (sykon also meant vulva). The modern accepted explanation is that
prominent politicians in ancient Greece held aloof from such inflammatory gestures, but privately
urged their followers to taunt their opponents. The sense of mean, servile flatterer is first
recorded in English 1570s.    The explanation, long current, that it orig. meant an informer against
the unlawful exportation of figs cannot be substantiated. [OED]


sycophancy (n.)

1620s, from from sycophant + -cy, or else from Latin sycophantia, from Greek sykophantia false
accusation, slander; conduct of a sycophant, from sykophantes.


lickspittle (n.)

also lick-spittle, sycophant, abject toady, 1741, from lick (v.1) + spittle.


fig (n.)

early 13c., from Old French figue (12c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al figa, from Vulgar Latin *fica,
from Latin ficus fig tree, fig, which, with Greek sykon, Armenian t'uz is prob. fr. a common
Mediterranean source [Buck], possibly a Semitic one (compare Phoenician pagh half-ripe fig). A
reborrowing of a word that had been taken directly from Latin as Old English fic.    The insulting
sense of the word in Shakespeare, etc. (A fig for ...) is 1570s, in part from fig as small,
valueless thing, but also from Greek and Italian use of their versions of the word as slang for
vulva, apparently because of how a ripe fig looks when split open [Rawson, Weekley]. Giving the fig
(French faire la figue, Spanish dar la higa) was an indecent gesture of ancient provenance, made by
putting the thumb between two fingers or into the mouth, with the intended effect of the modern
gesture of flipping the bird (see bird (n.3)). Also compare sycophant. Use of fig leaf in figurative
sense of flimsy disguise (1550s) is from Gen. iii:7.


