Sylvanus

Roman deity, from Latin Silvanus, used by the Romans as the proper name of a god of woods and
fields, identified with Pan, noun use of adjective, literally pertaining to woods or forest (see
sylvan).


sylvan (adj.)

of the woods, 1570s, from Middle French sylvain (1530s), from Latin silvanus pertaining to wood or
forest (originally only in silvanae goddesses of the woods), from silva wood, woodland, forest,
orchard, grove, of unknown origin. The unetymological -y- is a misspelling in Latin from influence
of Greek hyle forest, from which the Latin word formerly was supposed to derive.


silvan (adj.)

see sylvan.


Sylvia

fem. proper name, literally inhabiting woods, from Latin silva wood, forest (see sylvan). Also the
genus name of warblers, hence adjective Sylvian.


Transylvania

literally beyond the forest, from Medieval Latin, from trans beyond (see trans-) + sylva (see
sylvan). So called in reference to the wooded mountains that surround it.


Sylvester

masc. proper name, from Latin silvestris, literally of a wood, of a forest, woody, rural, pastoral,
from silva wood, forest (see sylvan). St. Sylvester's Day is Dec. 31.


Silas

masc. proper name, from Late Latin, from Greek Silas, contraction of Silouanos, transliteration of
Latin Silvanus, a name that literally means living in the woods, from silva wood (see sylvan).


savage (adj.)

mid-13c., fierce, ferocious; c.1300, wild, undomesticated, untamed (of animals and places), from Old
French sauvage, salvage wild, savage, untamed, strange, pagan, from Late Latin salvaticus,
alteration of silvaticus wild, literally of the woods, from silva forest, grove (see sylvan). Of
persons, the meaning reckless, ungovernable is attested from c.1400, earlier in sense indomitable,
valiant (c.1300).


Pennsylvania

American colony, later U.S. state, 1681, literally Penn's Woods, a hybrid formed from the surname
Penn (Welsh, literally head) + Latin sylvania (see sylvan). Not named for William Penn, the
proprietor, but, on suggestion of Charles II, for Penn's late father, Admiral William Penn
(1621-1670), who had lent the king the money that was repaid to the son in the form of land for a
Quaker settlement in America. The story goes that the younger Penn wanted to call it New Wales, but
the king's secretary, a Welshman of orthodox religion, wouldn't hear of it. Pennsylvania Dutch is
attested from 1824.


