symmetry (n.)

1560s, relation of parts, proportion, from Middle French symm&#233;trie (16c.) and directly from
Latin symmetria, from Greek symmetria agreement in dimensions, due proportion, arrangement, from
symmetros having a common measure, even, proportionate, from assimilated form of syn- together (see
syn-) + metron meter (see meter (n.2)). Meaning harmonic arrangement of parts first recorded 1590s.


asymmetry (n.)

1650s, want of symmetry or proportion, from Greek asymmetria, noun of quality from asymmetros having
no common measure; disproportionate, unsymmetrical, from a- not + symmetros commensurable (see
symmetry).


symmetrophobia (n.)

1809, from comb. form of symmetry + -phobia. Supposed to be evident in Egyptian temples and Japanese
art.


symmetric (adj.)

1796, from symmetry + -ic. Earlier in the same sense was symmetral (1650s).


symmetrical (adj.)

1751, from symmetry + -ical. Related: Symmetrically (1570s).


competency (n.)

1590s, rivalry; c.1600, sufficiency to satisfy the wants of life, from Latin competentia meeting
together, agreement, symmetry, from competens, present participle of competere (see compete).
Meaning sufficiency of qualification is recorded from 1797.


equity (n.)

early 14c., from Old French equite (13c.), from Latin aequitatem (nominative aequitas) equality,
conformity, symmetry, fairness, from aequus even, just, equal (see equal (adj.)). As the name of a
system of law, 1590s, from Roman naturalis aequitas, the general principles of justice which
corrected or supplemented the legal codes.


competence (n.)

1590s, rivalry (based on compete); c.1600 adequate supply; 1630s, sufficiency of means for living at
ease, from French comp&eacute;tence, from Latin competentia meeting together, agreement, symmetry,
from competens, present participle of competere, especially in its earlier sense of fall together,
come together, be convenient or fitting (see compete). Meaning sufficiency to deal with what is at
hand is from 1790.


symmetrize (v.)

1749, from French symm&#233;triser, from symm&#233;trie (see symmetry). Related: Symmetrize;
symmetrizing.


rhythm (n.)

1550s, rhymed verse, metrical movement, from Latin rhythmus movement in time, from Greek rhythmos
measured flow or movement, rhythm; proportion, symmetry; arrangement, order; form, shape, wise,
manner; soul, disposition, related to rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (see rheum).
Rhythm method of birth control attested from 1936. Rhythm and blues, U.S. music style, is from 1949
(first in Billboard).


pentagon (n.)

plane figure with five angles and five sides, 1560s, from Middle French pentagone or directly from
Late Latin pentagonum pentagon, from Greek pentagonon, noun use of neuter of adjective pentagonos
five-angled, from pente five (see five) + gonia angle (see knee (n.)). The U.S. military
headquarters Pentagon was completed 1942, so called for its shape; used allusively for U.S. military
leadership from 1945. Related: Pentagonal.    In nature, pentagonal symmetry is rare in inanimate
forms. Packed soap bubbles seem to strive for it but never quite succeed, and there are no mineral
crystals with true pentagonal structures. But pentagonal geometry is basic to many living things,
from roses and forget-me-nots to sea urchins and starfish. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of
Typographic Style, 1992]


round (adj.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French rounde, Old French roont (12c., Modern French rond), probably
originally *redond, from Vulgar Latin *retundus (source also of Proven&ccedil;al redon, Spanish
redondo, Old Italian ritondo), from Latin rotundus like a wheel, circular, round, related to rota
wheel (see rotary).    As an adverb from c.1300; as a preposition from c.1600. In many uses it is a
shortened form of around. The French word is the source of Middle Dutch ront (Dutch rond), Middle
High German runt (German rund) and similar Germanic words.    Of numbers from mid-14c., from earlier
sense full, complete, brought to completion (mid-14c., notion of symmetry extended to that of
completeness). First record of round trip is from 1844, originally of railways. Round heels attested
from 1926, in reference to incompetent boxers, 1927 in reference to loose women, in either case
implying an inability to avoid ending up flat on one's back.


