synthesis (n.)

1610s, deductive reasoning, from Latin synthesis collection, set, suit of clothes, composition (of a
medication), from Greek synthesis composition, a putting together, from syntithenai put together,
combine, from syn- together (see syn-) + tithenai put, place (see theme). From 1733 as a combination
of parts into a whole. Earlier borrowed in Middle English as sintecis (mid-15c.). Plural syntheses.


synthetic (adj.)

1690s, as a term in logic, deductive, from French synth&eacute;tique (17c.) and directly from Modern
Latin syntheticus, from Greek synthetikos skilled in putting together, constructive, from synthetos
put together, constructed, compounded, past participle of syntithenai to put together (see
synthesis). From 1874 in reference to products or materials made artificially by chemical synthesis;
hence artificial (1930). As a noun, synthetic material, from 1934. Related: Synthetical (1620s in
logic).


photosynthesis (n.)

1898, loan-translation of German Photosynthese, from photo- light (see photo-) + synthese synthesis
(see synthesis). Another early word for it was photosyntax.    [T]he body of the work has been
rendered into English with fidelity, the only change of moment being the substitution of the word
photosynthesis for that of assimilation. This change follows from a suggestion by Dr. Barnes, made a
year ago before the American Association at Madison, who clearly pointed out the need of a
distinctive term for the synthetical process in plants, brought about by protoplasm in the presence
of chlorophyll and light. He proposed the word photosyntax, which met with favor. In the discussion
Professor MacMillan suggested the word photosynthesis, as etymologically more satisfactory and
accurate, a claim which Dr. Barnes showed could not be maintained. The suggestion of Dr. Barnes not
only received tacit acceptance by the botanists of the association, but was practically approved by
the Madison Congress in the course of a discussion upon this point. [The Botanical Gazette, vol.
XIX, 1894]


chemosynthesis (n.)

1898, from chemo- + synthesis.


polysynthesis (n.)

1837, from poly- + synthesis.


synthesize (v.)

combine or bring together (two or more things), 1825, from synthesis + -ize. A correct formation
would be *synthetize. Related: Synthesized; synthesizing.


analysis (n.)

1580s, resolution of anything complex into simple elements (opposite of synthesis), from Medieval
Latin analysis (15c.), from Greek analysis a breaking up, a loosening, releasing, noun of action
from analyein unloose, release, set free; to loose a ship from its moorings, in Aristotle, to
analyze, from ana up, throughout (see ana-) + lysis a loosening, from lyein to unfasten (see lose).
Psychological sense is from 1890. Phrase in the final (or last) analysis (1844), translates French
en derni&egrave;re analyse.


