tablet (n.)

c.1300, slab or flat surface for an inscription (especially the two Mosaic tables of stone), from
Old French tablete small table, merchant's display counter (13c., Modern French tablette),
diminutive of table slab, or from Medieval Latin tabuleta (source also of Spanish tableta, Italian
tavoletta), diminutive of Latin tabula (see table (n.)). The meaning lozenge, pill is first recorded
1580s; that of pad of writing paper in 1880.


tabula rasa (n.)

the mind in its primary state, 1530s, from Latin tabula rasa, literally scraped tablet, from which
writing has been erased, thus ready to be written on again, from tabula (see table (n.)) + rasa,
fem. past participle of radere to scrape away, erase (see raze). A loan-translation of Aristotle's
pinakis agraphos, literally unwritten tablet (De anima, 7.22).


tab (n.2)

account, bill, check, 1888, American English colloquial, probably a shortened form of tabulation or
of tablet in the sense a sheet for writing on. Figurative phrase keep a tab on is recorded from
1890.


cere (n.)

late 15c., from French cire wax (12c.), from Latin cera wax, wax seal, wax writing tablet, related
to Greek keros beeswax, of unknown origin.


tabloid (n.)

1884, Tabloid, small tablet of medicine, trademark name (by Burroughs, Wellcome and Co.) for
compressed or concentrated chemicals and drugs, a hybrid formed from tablet + Greek-derived suffix
-oid. By 1898, it was being used figuratively to mean a compressed form or dose of anything, hence
tabloid journalism (1901), and newspapers that typified it (1917), so called for having short,
condensed news articles and/or for being small in size. Associated originally with Alfred C.
Harmsworth, editor and proprietor of the London Daily Mail.    Mr. Harmsworth entered a printing
office twenty years ago as office-boy, and today owns thirty periodicals besides The Mail. Upon a
friendly challenge from Mr. Pulitzer of The New York World, the English journalist issued the first
number of The World for the new century in the ideal form. The size of the page was reduced to four
columns and the general make-up was similar in appearance to that of one of the weekly magazines.
Current news was presented in condensed and tabulated form, of which the editor says: The world
enters today upon the twentieth or time-saving century. I claim that by my system of condensed or
tabloid journalism hundreds of working hours can be saved each year. [The Twentieth Century
Newspaper, in The Social Gospel, February 1901]


tab (n.3)

1961, shortened form of tablet (especially one of sugar containing LSD). As an abbreviation of
tabloid (newspaper) it is 1990s slang. As a short form of tabulator key of a typewriter (later
computer) it is recorded from 1916.


codicil (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French codicille, from Latin codicillus a short writing, a small writing
tablet, diminutive of codex (genitive codicis), see code (n.).


tabular (adj.)

table-shaped, 1650s, from French tabulaire  or directly from Latin tabularis of a slab or tablet, of
boards or planks, from tabula slab (see table (n.)). Meaning arranged in a list or columns;
ascertained or computed by means of tables is from 1710.


tessera (n.)

plural tesserae, small, square piece of stone, 1650s, from Latin tessera a die, cube, square tablet
with writing on it used as a token or ticket, from Ionic Greek tessera, neuter of tesseres (Attic
tessares) four (see four).


plaque (n.)

1848, ornamental plate or tablet, from French plaque metal plate, coin (15c.), perhaps through
Flemish placke small coin, from Middle Dutch placke disk, patch, stain, related to German Placken
spot, patch (compare placard). Meaning deposit on walls of arteries is first attested 1891; that of
bacteria deposits on teeth is 1898.


tableau (n.)

1690s, a picturesque or graphic description or picture, from French tableau picture, painting
(12c.), from Old French table slab, writing tablet (see table (n.)) + diminutive suffix -eau, from
Latin -ellus. Hence tableau-vivant (1817) person or persons silent and motionless, enacting a well-
known scene, incident, painting, etc., 19c. parlor game, literally living picture.


slate (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French esclate, fem. of esclat split piece, splinter (Modern French &eacute;clat;
see slat), so called because the rock splits easily into thin plates. As an adjective, 1510s. As a
color, first recorded 1813. Sense of a writing tablet (made of slate), first recorded late 14c., led
to that of list of preliminary candidates prepared by party managers, first recorded 1842, from
notion of being easily altered or erased. Clean slate (1856) is an image from customer accounts
chalked up in a tavern.


palette (n.)

1620s, flat thin tablet used by an artist to lay and mix colors, from French palette, from Old
French palete small shovel, blade (13c.) diminutive of pale shovel, blade, from Latin pala spade,
shoulder blade, probably from PIE *pak-slo-, from root *pag- (see pact). Transferred sense of colors
used by a particular artist is from 1882.


album (n.)

1650s, from Latin album white color, whiteness, neuter of albus white (see alb). In classical times
a blank tablet on which the Pontifex Maximus registered the principal events of the year; a list of
names. Revived 16c. by German scholars whose custom was to keep an album amicorum of colleagues'
signatures; meaning then expanded into book to collect souvenirs. According to Johnson, a book in
which foreigners have long been accustomed to insert autographs of celebrated people. Photographic
albums first recorded 1859. Meaning long-playing gramophone record is by 1951, because the sleeves
they came in resembled large albums.


suffrage (n.)

late 14c., intercessory prayers or pleas on behalf of another, from Old French sofrage plea,
intercession (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin suffragium, from Latin suffragium support,
ballot, vote; right of voting; a voting tablet, from suffragari lend support, vote for someone,
conjectured to be a compound of sub under (see sub-) + fragor crash, din, shouts (as of approval),
related to frangere to break (see fraction). On another theory (Watkins, etc.) the second element is
frangere itself and the notion is use a broken piece of tile as a ballot (compare ostracism).
Meaning a vote for or against anything is from 1530s. The meaning political right to vote in English
is first found in the U.S. Constitution, 1787.


lozenge (n.)

figure having four equal sides and two acute and two obtuse angles, early 14c., from Old French
losenge windowpane, small square cake, etc., used for many flat quadrilateral things (Modern French
losange). It has cognates in Spanish losanje, Catalan llosange, Italian lozanga. Probably from a
pre-Roman Celtic language, perhaps Iberian *lausa or Gaulish *lausa flat stone (compare
Proven&ccedil;al lausa, Spanish losa, Catalan llosa, Portuguese lousa slab, tombstone), from a pre-
Celtic language.    Originally in English a term in heraldry; meaning small cake or tablet
(originally diamond-shaped) of medicine and sugar, etc., meant to be held in the mouth and dissolved
is from 1520s.


card (n.1)

c.1400, playing card, from Middle French carte (14c.), from Latin charta leaf of paper, tablet, from
Greek khartes layer of papyrus, probably from Egyptian. Form influenced after 14c. by Italian carta
(see chart (n.)).    Sense of playing cards also is oldest in French. Sense in English extended by
1590s to similar small, flat, stiff bits of paper. Meaning printed ornamental greetings for special
occasions is from 1869. Application to clever or original persons (1836, originally with an
adjective, as in smart card) is from the playing-card sense, via expressions such as sure card an
expedient certain to attain an object (c.1560).   Card table is from 1713. Card-sharper is 1859.
House of cards in the figurative sense is from 1640s, first attested in Milton. To have a card up
(one's) sleeve is 1898; to play the _______ card is from 1886, originally the Orange card, meaning
appeal to Northern Irish Protestant sentiment (for political advantage).


letter (n.1)

c.1200, graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character, from Old French letre (10c., Modern
French lettre) character, letter; missive, note, in plural, literature, writing, learning, from
Latin littera (also litera) letter of the alphabet, of uncertain origin, perhaps via Etruscan from
Greek diphthera tablet, with change of d- to l- as in lachrymose. In this sense it replaced Old
English bocst&aelig;f, literally book staff (compare German Buchstabe letter, character, from Old
High German buohstab, from Proto-Germanic *bok-staba-m).    Latin littera also meant a writing,
document, record, and in   plural litter&aelig; a letter, epistle, a sense first attested in English
early 13c., replacing Old English &aelig;rendgewrit, literally errand-writing. The Latin plural also
meant literature, books, and figuratively learning, liberal education, schooling (see letters).
School letter in sports, attested by 1908, were said to have been first awarded by University of
Chicago football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg. Expression to the letter precisely is from 1520s (earlier
as after the letter). Letter-perfect is from 1845, originally in theater jargon, in reference to an
actor knowing the lines exactly. Letter-press, in reference to matter printed from relief surfaces,
is from 1840.


table (n.)

late 12c., board, slab, plate, from Old French table board, square panel, plank; writing table;
picture; food, fare (11c.), and late Old English tabele writing tablet, gaming table, from Germanic
*tabal (cognates: Dutch tafel, Danish tavle, Old High German zabel board, plank, German Tafel). Both
the French and Germanic words are from Latin tabula a board, plank; writing table; list, schedule;
picture, painted panel, originally small flat slab or piece usually for inscriptions or for games
(source also of Spanish tabla, Italian tavola), of uncertain origin, related to Umbrian tafle on the
board.    The sense of piece of furniture with the flat top and legs first recorded c.1300 (the
usual Latin word for this was mensa (see mensa); Old English writers used bord (see board (n.1)).
Especially the table at which people eat, hence food placed upon a table (c.1400 in English). The
meaning arrangement of numbers or other figures on a tabular surface for convenience is recorded
from late 14c. (as in table of contents, mid-15c.).    Figurative phrase turn the tables (1630s) is
from backgammon (in Old and Middle English the game was called tables). Table talk familiar
conversation around a table is attested from 1560s, translating Latin colloquia mensalis. Table-
manners is from 1824. Table-hopping is first recorded 1943. The adjectival phrase under-the-table
hidden from view is recorded from 1949; to be under the table passed out from excess drinking is
recorded from 1913. Table tennis ping-pong is recorded from 1887. Table-rapping in spiritualism,
supposedly an effect of supernatural powers, is from 1853.


