taciturnity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French taciturnit&eacute;, from Latin taciturnitatem (nominative taciturnitas)
a being or keeping silent, from taciturnus disposed to be silent, from tacitus silent (see tacit).


tacit (adj.)

c.1600, silent, unspoken, from French tacite and directly from Latin tacitus that is passed over in
silence, done without words, assumed as a matter of course, silent, past participle of tacere be
silent, not speak, from suffixed form of PIE root *tak- to be silent (cognates: Gothic &thorn;ahan,
Old Norse &thorn;egja to be silent, Old Norse &thorn;agna to grow dumb, Old Saxon thagian, Old High
German dagen to be silent). The musical instruction tacet is the 3rd person present singular of the
Latin verb. Related: Tacitly.


tace

be silent! Latin imperative of tacere to be silent (see tacit).


tacet

musical instruction, 1724, from Latin tacet is silent, third person singular present indicative of
tacere (see tacit).


reticence (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French r&eacute;ticence (16c.), from Latin reticentia silence, a keeping silent,
from present participle stem of reticere keep silent, from re- (see re-), + tacere be silent (see
tacit). Not in common use until after 1830 [OED].


insoluble (adj.)

late 14c., unable to be loosened, from Latin insolubilis that cannot be loosened, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + solubilis (see soluble). Figurative use, of problems, etc., is from late 14c.It was a
tacit conviction of the learned during the Middle Ages that no such thing as an insoluble question
existed. There might be matters that presented serious difficulties, but if you could lay them
before the right man -- some Arab in Spain, for instance, omniscient by reason of studies into the
details of which it was better not to inquire -- he would give you a conclusive answer. The real
trouble was only to find your man. [Gertrude Bell, The Desert and the Sown, 1907]


photosynthesis (n.)

1898, loan-translation of German Photosynthese, from photo- light (see photo-) + synthese synthesis
(see synthesis). Another early word for it was photosyntax.    [T]he body of the work has been
rendered into English with fidelity, the only change of moment being the substitution of the word
photosynthesis for that of assimilation. This change follows from a suggestion by Dr. Barnes, made a
year ago before the American Association at Madison, who clearly pointed out the need of a
distinctive term for the synthetical process in plants, brought about by protoplasm in the presence
of chlorophyll and light. He proposed the word photosyntax, which met with favor. In the discussion
Professor MacMillan suggested the word photosynthesis, as etymologically more satisfactory and
accurate, a claim which Dr. Barnes showed could not be maintained. The suggestion of Dr. Barnes not
only received tacit acceptance by the botanists of the association, but was practically approved by
the Madison Congress in the course of a discussion upon this point. [The Botanical Gazette, vol.
XIX, 1894]


