taint (n.)

c.1600, stain, spot, from Old French teint color, hue, dye, stain, from Latin tinctus a dyeing, from
tingere to dye (see tincture). Meaning a moral stain, corruption, contaminating influence is from
1610s.


taint (v.)

1570s, to corrupt, contaminate, also to touch, tinge, imbue slightly (1590s), from Middle English
teynten to convict, prove guilty (late 14c.), partly from Old French ataint, past participle of
ataindre to touch upon, seize (see attainder). Also from Anglo-French teinter to color, dye (early
15c.), from Old French teint (12c.), past participle of teindre to dye, color, from Latin tingere
(see tincture). Related: Tainted; tainting.


untainted (adj.)

1580s, in the moral sense; c.1600 in the physical sense; from un- (1) not + past participle of taint
(v.). Earlier was untained (mid-15c.), from a Middle English variant of taint (v.).


assiduous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin assiduus attending; continually present, incessant; busy; constant, from assidere
to sit down to, thus constantly occupied at one's work; from ad to (see ad-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary). The word acquired a taint of servility in 18c. Related: Assiduously; assiduousness.


envenom (v.)

c.1300, envenymen, from Old French envenimer (12c.) to poison, taint; from en- (see en- (1)) + venim
(see venom). Figurative use is from late 14c. Related: Envenomed; envenoming.


perineum (n.)

region of the body between the anus and the genital organs (jocularly called a taint), early 15c.,
from Medieval Latin perinaeon, Late Latin perineum, from Greek perinaion, perinaios, from peri- near
(see peri-) + inan to carry off by evacuation, of unknown origin.


miasma (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin miasma noxious vapors, from Greek miasma (genitive miasmatos) stain,
pollution, defilement, taint of guilt, from stem of miainein to pollute, from possible PIE root
*mai- to stain, soil, defile (source of Old English mal stain, mark, see mole (n.1)). Earlier form
was miasm (1640s), from French miasme. Related: Miasmatic; miasmal.


do-gooder (n.)

a person who seeks to correct social ills in an idealistic, but usually impractical or superficial,
way, 1650s (as do-good), in Zootomia, or Observations on the Present Manners of the English: Briefly
Anatomizing the Living by the Dead. With An Usefull Detection of the Mountebanks of Both Sexes,
written by Richard Whitlock, a medical doctor. Probably used even then with a taint of impractical
idealism. Modern pejorative use seems to have begun on the socialist left, mocking those who were
unwilling to take a hard line. OED has this citation, from The Nation in 1923:    There is nothing
the matter with the United States except ... the parlor socialists, up-lifters, and do-goods.    The
form do-gooder appears in American English from 1927, presumably because do-good was no longer felt
as sufficiently noun-like. A slightly older word for this was goo-goo.


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


Roman (n.)

Old English, from Latin Romanus of Rome, Roman, from Roma Rome (see Rome). The adjective is c.1300,
from Old French Romain. The Old English adjective was romanisc, which yielded Middle English
Romanisshe.    As a type of numeral (usually contrasted to Arabic) it is attested from 1728; as a
type of lettering (based on the upright style typical of Roman inscriptions, contrasted to Gothic,
or black letter, and italic) it is recorded from 1510s. Roman nose is from 1620s. Roman candle as a
type of fireworks is recorded from 1834. Roman Catholic is attested from c.1600, a conciliatory
formation from the time of the Spanish Match, replacing Romanist, Romish which by that time had the
taint of insult in Protestant England.


Nazi

1930, noun and adjective, from German Nazi, abbreviation of German pronunciation of
Nationalsozialist (based on earlier German sozi, popular abbreviation of socialist), from
Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei National Socialist German Workers' Party, led by
Hitler from 1920.    The 24th edition of Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch der deutschen Sprache (2002)
says the word Nazi was favored in southern Germany (supposedly from c.1924) among opponents of
National Socialism because the nickname Nazi, Naczi (from the masc. proper name Ignatz, German form
of Ignatius) was used colloquially to mean a foolish person, clumsy or awkward person. Ignatz was a
popular name in Catholic Austria, and according to one source in World War I Nazi was a generic name
in the German Empire for the soldiers of Austria-Hungary.    An older use of Nazi for national-
sozial is attested in German from 1903, but EWdS does not think it contributed to the word as
applied to Hitler and his followers. The NSDAP for a time attempted to adopt the Nazi designation as
what the Germans call a despite-word, but they gave this up, and the NSDAP is said to have generally
avoided the term. Before 1930, party members had been called in English National Socialists, which
dates from 1923. The use of Nazi Germany, Nazi regime, etc., was popularized by German exiles
abroad. From them, it spread into other languages, and eventually was brought back to Germany, after
the war. In the USSR, the terms national socialist and Nazi were said to have been forbidden after
1932, presumably to avoid any taint to the good word socialist. Soviet literature refers to
fascists.


