tan (v.)

late Old English tannian to convert hide into leather (by steeping it in tannin), from Medieval
Latin tannare tan, dye a tawny color (c.900), from tannum crushed oak bark, used in tanning leather,
probably from a Celtic source (such as Breton tann oak tree). The meaning make brown by exposure to
the sun (as tanning does to hides) first recorded 1520s; intransitive sense also from 1520s. Of
persons, not considered an attractive feature until 20c.; in Shakespeare, to deprive of the
freshness and beauty of youth (Sonnet CXV). As an adjective from 1620s. To tan (someone's) hide in
the figurative sense is from 1660s. Related: Tanned; tanning. German Tanne fir tree (as in
Tannenbaum) might be a transferred meaning from the same Celtic source.


tan (n.)

bronze color imparted to skin by exposure to sun, 1749, see tan (v.). Earlier as substance made of
crushed bark used in making leather (c.1600). As a simple name for a brownish color, in any context,
it is recorded from 1888. The adjective meaning of the color of tanned leather is recorded from
1660s. Tan-line attested from 1979.


tanager (n.)

small American oscine bird, 1844, earlier tanagra (1610s), from Modern Latin tanagra, alteration of
Portuguese tangara, from Tupi (Brazil) tangara, a bird name of uncertain meaning.


tandem (n.)

1785, carriage pulled by horses harnessed one behind the other (instead of side-by-side), jocular
use of Latin tandem at length (of time), at last, so much, from tam so (from PIE *tam-, adverbial
form of demonstrative pronoun root *-to-; see -th (1)) + demonstrative suffix -dem. Probably first
in university use [Century Dictionary]. Transferred by 1884 to bicycles with two seats. In English
as an adverb from 1795; as an adjective from 1801.


tandoor (n.)

1660s, from Turkish pronunciation of Persian and Arabic tannur oven, portable furnace (see
tandoori).


tandoori (adj.)

in reference to a type of Indian cooking, 1958, from adjectival form of Urdu or Punjabi tandur
cooking stove, from Turkish tandur, from Turkish pronunciation of Arabic and Persian tannur oven,
portable furnace, of Semitic origin. As a noun by 1969.


tang (n.)

mid-14c., serpent's tongue (thought to be a stinging organ), later sharp extension of a metal blade
(1680s), from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tangi spit of land; pointed end by which a
blade is driven into a handle, from Proto-Germanic *tang-, from PIE *denk- to bite (see tongs).
Influenced in some senses by tongue (n.). Figurative sense of a sharp taste is first recorded mid-
15c.; that of suggestion, trace is from 1590s. The fish (1734) so called for their spines.


tangelo (n.)

hybrid of a tangerine and a pomelo, 1904, the word formed like the fruit.


tangent (adj.)

1590s, meeting at a point without intersecting, from Latin tangentem (nominative tangens), present
participle of tangere to touch, from PIE root *tag- to touch, to handle; border on; taste, partake
of; strike, hit; figuratively affect, impress; trick, cheat; mention, speak of (cognates: Latin
tactus touch; Greek tassein to arrange, tetagon having seized; Old English &thorn;accian stroke,
strike gently). First used by Danish mathematician Thomas Fincke in Geomietria Rotundi (1583).
Extended sense of slightly connected with a subject is first recorded 1825. Related: Tangence;
tangency.


tangent (n.)

1590s as a geometric function, from tangent (adj.). From 1650s as a tangent line. Figurative use of
off on a tangent is from 1771.


tangental (adj.)

1742, from tangent (adj.) + -al (1). Related: Tangentally.


tangential (adj.)

1620s, see tangent (adj.) + -ial. Figurative sense of divergent, erratic is from 1787; that of
slightly connected is from 1825. Related: Tangentially.


tangerine (n.)

1842, from tangerine orange (1820) an orange from Tangier, seaport in northern Morocco, from which
it was imported to Britain originally. As an adjective meaning from Tangier, attested from 1710,
probably from Spanish tangerino. As a color name, attested from 1899.


tangible (adj.)

1580s, capable of being touched, from Middle French tangible and directly from Late Latin tangibilis
that may be touched, from Latin tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Sense of material (as in
tangible reward) is first recorded 1610s; that of able to be realized or dealt with is from 1709.
Related: Tangibly.


Tangier

port city of Morocco, Latin Tinge, said to be named for Tingis, daughter of Atlas, but probably from
Semitic tigisis harbor. In English often Tangiers, by influence of Algiers.


tangle (n.)

1610s, a tangled condition, a snarl of threads, from tangle (v.).


tangle (v.)

mid-14c., nasalized variant of tagilen to involve in a difficult situation, entangle, from a
Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Swedish taggla to disorder, Old Norse &thorn;ongull seaweed),
from Proto-Germanic *thangul- (cognates: Frisian tung, Dutch tang, German Tang seaweed); thus the
original sense of the root evidently was seaweed as something that entangles (itself, or oars, or
fishes, or nets). The development of such a verb from a noun of limited use like tangle 1 is
somewhat remarkable, and needs confirmation [Century Dictionary]. In reference to material things,
from c.1500. Meaning to fight with is American English, first recorded 1928. Related: Tangled;
tangling. Tanglefoot (1859) was Western American English slang for strong whiskey.


tango (n.)

syncopated ballroom dance, 1913 (the year it became a rage in Britain and America), from Argentine
Spanish tango, originally the name of an African-American drum dance, probably from a Niger-Congo
language (compare Ibibio tamgu to dance). Phrase it takes two to tango was a song title from 1952.
As a verb from 1913. Related: Tangoed.    It is hardly a year ago since the Tango reached this
country from South America by way of Paris. It was at first no more than a music-hall freak. But
some of those mysterious people who inspire new social fashions were attracted by its sinuous
movements and the strange backward kick, and this year it made its way into private houses as well
as public ball rooms. [The Living Age, Dec. 13, 1913]    <hr />   I need not describe the various
horrors of American and South American negroid origin. I would only ask hostesses to let one know
what houses to avoid by indicating in some way on their invitation cards whether the 'turkey-trot,'
the 'Boston' (the beginner of the evil), and the 'tango' will be permitted. [quoted in Current
Opinion, October 1913, as from a letter to the London Times]


tangram (n.)

Chinese geometric puzzle, 1864, said to be an arbitrary formation based on anagram, etc. First
element perhaps Chinese t'an to extend, or t'ang, commonly used in Cantonese for Chinese. Some
suggest it is the name of the inventor, but no such person is known to Chinese scholars [OED].
Another theory involves the Tanka, an outcast aboriginal people of southern China, and Western
sailors who discovered the puzzle from their Tanka girlfriends. Perhaps from an obscure sense of
tram. The Chinese name is Ch'i ch'iao t'u seven ingenious plan.


tangy (adj.)

1875, from tang + -y (2). Figurative use by 1948. Related: Tanginess.


tanist (n.)

elected heir of a Celtic chief, 1530s, from Gaelic tanaiste presumptive or apparent heir to a lord,
literally parallel, second, from Old Irish tanaise designated successor, from Celtic *tani-hessio-
one who is waited for.


tank (n.)

1610s, pool or lake for irrigation or drinking water, a word originally brought by the Portuguese
from India, from a Hindi source, such as Gujarati tankh cistern, underground reservoir for water,
Marathi tanken, or tanka reservoir of water, tank. Perhaps ultimately from Sanskrit tadaga-m pond,
lake pool, and reinforced in later sense of large artificial container for liquid (1680s) by
Portuguese tanque reservoir, from estancar hold back a current of water, from Vulgar Latin
*stanticare (see stanch). But other sources say the Portuguese word is the source of the Indian
ones. Meaning fuel container is recorded from 1902. Slang meaning detention cell is from 1912.
Railroad tank-car is from 1874.    In military use, armored, gun-mounted vehicle moving on
continuous articulated tracks, the word originated late 1915. In Tanks in the Great War [1920],
Brevet Col. J.F.C. Fuller quotes a memorandum of the Committee of Imperial Defence dated Dec. 24,
1915, recommending the proposed caterpillar machine-gun destroyer machines be entrusted to an
organization which, for secrecy, shall be called the 'Tank Supply Committee,' ... In a footnote,
Fuller writes, This is the first appearance of the word 'tank' in the history of the machine. He
writes that cistern and reservoir also were put forth as possible cover names, all of which were
applicable to the steel-like structure of the machines in the early stages of manufacture. Because
it was less clumsy and monosyllabic, the name 'tank' was decided on. They were first used in action
at Pozieres ridge, on the Western Front, Sept. 15, 1916, and the name was quickly picked up by the
soldiers. Tank-trap attested from 1920.


tank (v.)

1900, to put into a tank, from tank (n.). Meaning to lose or fail attested from 1976, originally in
tennis jargon, specifically in an interview with Billie Jean King in Life magazine, Sept. 22, 1967:
When our men don't feel like trying, she says, They 'tank' [give up]. I never tanked a match in my
life and I never saw a girl do it. The men do it all the time in minor tournaments when they don't
feel like hustling. You have to be horribly competitive to win in big-time tennis.    Sometimes said
to be from boxing, in some sense, perhaps from the notion of taking a dive, but evidence for this is
wanting. Related: Tanked; tanking. Adjective tanked drunk is from 1893.


tank top (n.)

1968, from tank suit one-piece bathing costume (1920s), so called because it was worn in a swimming
tank (n.), i.e. pool.


tanka (n.)

type of Japanese poem, 1877, from Japanese tanka, from tan short + ka song.


tankard (n.)

late 14c., large tub-like vessel, corresponding to Middle Dutch tanckaert, meaning the same thing,
but both of unknown origin. A guess hazarded in OED is that it is a transposition of *kantard, from
Latin cantharus. Klein suggests French tant quart as much as a quarter. The notion that the word is
from tank 1 + -ard is wholly untenable [Century Dictionary]. Meaning drinking vessel is first
recorded late 15c.


tanker (n.)

ship for carrying oil or other liquid cargo, 1900, from tank (n.).


tanner (n.2)

sixpence, slang word first recorded 1811, of unknown origin. J.C. Hotten, lexicographer of Victorian
slang, thinks it may be from tanner and skin, rhyming slang for thin, presumably in reference to the
smallness of the coin. Not to be confused with tenner, slang for ten-pound note, which dates from
1861.


tanner (n.1)

one who tans leather, Old English tannere, agent noun from tannian (see tan (v.)).


tannery (n.)

c.1400, process of tanning, from Old French tannerie (13c.) or a native formation from tan (v.) +
-ery. Meaning place where tanning is done is from 1736, perhaps from tanner (n.1) + -y (2).


tannin (n.)

tannic acid, vegetable substance capable of converting animal hide to leather, 1802, from French
tannin (1798), from tan crushed oak bark containing tannin (see tan (v.)). Tannic acid first
recorded 1836, from French acide tannique, inroduced 1834 by French chemist Th&#233;ophile-Jules
Pelouze (1807-1867).


tanning (n.)

late 15c., process of tanning leather, verbal noun from tan (v.). Intransitive sense process of
getting  suntan is from 1944.


tansy (n.)

perennial herb native to northern Eurasia, mid-13c., from Old French tanesie (13c., Modern French
tanaisie), from Vulgar Latin *tanaceta (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Late Latin
tanacetum wormwood, from shortened form of Greek athanasia immortality, from athanatos immortal,
from a- not, privative prefix, + thanatos death (see thanatology). So called probably for its
persistence. English folklore associates it with pregnancy, either as an aid to contraception or to
provoke miscarriage.


tantalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of tantalize. For suffix, see -ize. Related: Tantalised;
tantalising.


tantalize (v.)

1590s, with -ize + Latin Tantalus, from Greek Tantalos, king of Phrygia, son of Zeus, father of
Pelops and Niobe, punished in the afterlife (for an offense variously given) by being made to stand
in a river up to his chin, under branches laden with fruit, all of which withdrew from his reach
whenever he tried to eat or drink. His story was known to Chaucer (c.1369). Related: Tantalized;
tantalizing; tantalizingly; tantalization.


tantalizing (adj.)

mid-17c., present participle adjective from tantalize. Related: Tantalizingly.


tantalum (n.)

metallic element, 1809, Modern Latin, named 1802 by its discoverer, Swedish chemist Anders Ekberg
(1767-1813), for Tantalus, according to Ekberg partly because of its inability to absorb acid
recalled Tantalus' punishment in the afterlife (see tantalize). Sometimes it is said to be so called
from the difficulty scientists faced in obtaining a pure specimen.


Tantalus

Greek Tantalos, king of Phrygia, perhaps literally the Bearer or the Sufferer, by dissimilation from
*tal-talos, a reduplication of PIE root *tele- to bear, carry, support (see extol), in reference to
his long endurance, but Watkins finds this unlikely. Compare tantalize.


tantamount (adj.)

1640s, from verbal phrase tant amount be equivalent (1620s), from Anglo-French tant amunter amount
to as much (late 13c.), from Old French tant as much (11c., from Latin tantus, from tam so; see
tandem) + amonter amount to, go up (see amount (v.)).


tantra (n.)

type of Hindu religious book, 1799, from Sanskrit tantram, literally loom, warp, hence,
figuratively, groundwork, system, doctrine, from tan to stretch, extend, from PIE root *ten- to
stretch, extend (see tenet).


tantric (adj.)

1905, from tantra + -ic; used loosely in the West to denote erotic spiritualism.


tantrum (n.)

1714, tanterum, originally colloquial, of unknown origin.


Tanzania

east African nation, formed 1964 by union of Tanganyika (named for the lake, the name of which is of
unknown origin) and Zanzibar. With country-name word-forming element -ia. Related: Tanzanian.


tanzanite (n.)

violet-blue gemstone, 1968, named by Henry B. Platt, vice president of Tiffany &amp; Co., because
the stone was discovered in the African nation of Tanzania.


-stan

place-name element in Afghanistan, Pakistan, etc., from Persian -stan country, from Indo-Iranian
*stanam place, literally where one stands, from PIE *sta-no-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand
(see stet).


acceptance (n.)

1570s, from Middle French acceptance, from accepter (see accept). Earlier in same sense was
acceptation (late 14c.).


accountancy (n.)

1854, from accountant + -cy.


accountant (n.)

mid-15c., accounting officer, one who renders accounts, from Old French acuntant (Modern French
accomptant), from present participle of accompter (see account (v.)). Sense of professional maker of
accounts is recorded from 1530s. The word also was an adjective in Middle English, accountable;
liable to render accounts (early 15c.).


acquaintance (n.)

c.1300, state of being acquainted; late 14c., person with whom one is acquainted; also personal
knowledge; from Old French acointance acquaintance, friendship, familiarity, noun of action from
acointer (see acquaint). Acquaintant (17c.), would have been better in the person known sense but is
now obsolete.


adjutant (n.)

military officer who assists superior officers, c.1600, from Latin adiutantem (nominative adiutans),
present participle of adiutare to give help to, help zealously, serve, frequentative of adiuvare
(past participle adiutus) help, assist, aid, support, from ad- to (see ad-) + iuvare to help, give
strength, support, perhaps from same root as iuvenis young person (see young).


