tardy (adj.)

1520s, slow, from Old French tardif slow, late (12c.), also the name of the snail character in the
Roman de Renart, from Vulgar Latin *tardivus, from Latin tardus slow, sluggish; late; dull, stupid,
of unknown origin. Meaning late in English is from 1660s.    This word, not much used in English
prose, is constantly employed in the U.S. and in Canada with reference to lateness in school-
attendance. [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]    Related: Tardily; tardiness. Earlier form of the
word in English was tardif, tardyve (late 15c.). Tardity slowness of movement or action is recorded
in English from early 15c., from Old French tardete, from Latin tarditas.


tardation (n.)

slowness, c.1500, from Late Latin tardationem (nominative tardatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of tardare to slow, related to tardus slow, sluggish (see tardy).


-ive

sufix forming adjectives from verbs, meaning pertaining to, tending to, in some cases from Old
French -if, but usually directly from Latin -ivus. In some words borrowed from French at an early
date it has been reduced to -y (as in hasty, tardy).


crass (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French crasse (16c.), from Latin crassus solid, thick, fat; dense. The literal
sense always has been rare in English; meaning grossly stupid is recorded from 1650s, from French.
Middle English had cras (adj.) slow, sluggish, tardy (mid-15c.), also crassitude thickness. Related:
Crassly; crassness.


retardation (n.)

early 15c., fact or action of making slower in movement or time, from Latin retardationem
(nominative retardatio) a delaying, noun of action from past participle stem of retardare to make
slow, delay, keep back, hinder, from re- (see re-), + tardare to slow, related to tardus slow,
sluggish (see tardy). Sense of educational slowness is from 1907.


tardigrade (adj.)

1620s, slow-going, slow-moving, from French tardigrade (17c.), from Latin tardigradus slow-paced,
from tardus slow (see tardy) + gradi to walk, go, step (see grade (n.)).


brady-

medical word-forming element meaning slow, delayed, tardy, from Greek bradys slow; as in bradycardia
(1890), with Latinized form of Greek kardia heart; bradykinesia, slow movement, with Greek kinesis
movement, motion; bradypnea, with Greek pneo/pnein to breathe.


jolly (adj.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French jolif festive, merry, amorous, pretty (12c.) of
uncertain origin (cognate with Italian giulivo merry, pleasant).    Perhaps a Germanic loan-word
from a source akin to Old Norse jol a winter feast (see yule), or from Latin gaudere to rejoice,
from PIE *gau- to rejoice (see joy). For loss of -f, compare tardy, hasty. Related: Jollily;
jolliness.


