tarry (adj.)

1550s, from tar (n.1) + -y (2). Tarry-fingered dishonest, thieving is from 1825.


tarry (v.)

early 14c., to delay, retard (transitive), of uncertain origin. Some suggest a connection to Latin
tardare to delay, or Old English tergan, tirgan to vex, irritate, exasperate, provoke, which yielded
a Middle English verb identical in form to this one. Intransitive meaning to linger is attested from
late 14c. Related: Tarried; tarrying; tarrysome.


demur (v.)

c.1200, to linger, tarry, delay, from Old French demorer delay, retard, from Latin demorari to
linger, loiter, tarry, from de- (see de-) + morari to delay, from mora a pause, delay (see
moratorium). Main modern sense of raise objections is first attested 1630s. Related: Demurred;
demurring.


hover (v.)

c.1400, hoveren, frequentative of hoven hover, tarry, linger; see hove (1). Related: Hovered;
hovering. As a noun from 1510s.


deport (v.1)

late 15c., to behave, from Old French deporter behave, deport (oneself) (12c.), also with a wide
range of meanings in Old French, such as be patient; take one's (sexual) pleasure with; amuse,
entertain; remain, delay, tarry; cheer, console, treat kindly; put aside, cast off, send away, from
de- from, off (see de-) + porter to carry, from Latin portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related:
Deported; deporting.


hesitation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French hesitacion or directly from Latin haesitationem (nominative haesitatio) a
hesitation, stammering, figuratively irresolution, uncertainty, noun of action from past participle
stem of haesitare stick fast, remain fixed; stammer in speech, figuratively hesitate, be irresolute,
be at a loss, be undecided, frequentative of haerere stick, cling, from PIE *ghais-e (source also of
Lithuanian gaistu to delay, tarry), from root *ghais- to adhere; hesitate.


linger (v.)

c.1300, lenger reside, dwell, northern England frequentative of lengen to tarry, from Old English
lengan prolong, lengthen, from Proto-Germanic *langjan to make long (cognates: Old Frisian lendza,
Old High German lengan, Dutch lengen to lengthen), source of Old English lang (see long (adj.)).
Sense of delay going, depart slowly and unwillingly is from 1520s. Related: Lingered; lingering.


stay (v.1)

mid-15c., cease going forward, come to a halt, also (transitive) detain, hold back, from Old French
estai-, stem of estare to stay or stand, from Latin stare to stand, stand still, remain standing; be
upright, be erect; stand firm, stand in battle; abide; be unmovable; be motionless; remain, tarry,
linger; take a side, (source also of Italian stare, Spanish estar to stand, to be), from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of remain is first recorded 1570s; that of reside as a guest for a
short period is from 1550s. Related: Stayed; staying.    Of things, remain in place, 1590s. Stay put
is first recorded 1843, American English. To stay put is to keep still, remain in order. A vulgar
expression [Bartlett]. Phrase stay the course is originally (1885) in reference to horses holding
out till the end of a race. Stay-stomach was (1800) a snack.


stop (v.)

Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian to stop up, stifle), a general West Germanic word, cognate
with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low German stoppen, Old High German stopfon,
German stopfen to plug, stop up, Old Low Frankish (be)stuppon to stop (the ears).    These words are
said by many sources to be a Germanic borrowing of Vulgar Latin *stuppare to stop or stuff with tow
or oakum (source of Italian stoppare, French &eacute;touper to stop with tow), from Latin stuppa
coarse part of flax, tow. In support of this theory, it is said that plugs made of tow were used
from ancient times in Rhine valley. Century Dictionary says this suits phonetically, but is on
grounds of meaning somewhat doubtful. Barnhart, for one, proposes the whole Germanic group might be
native, from a base *stoppon.     Sense of bring or come to a halt, discontinue (mid-15c.) is from
notion of preventing a flow by blocking a hole, and the word's development in this sense is unique
to English, though it since has been widely adopted in other languages; perhaps influenced by Latin
stupere be stunned, be stupefied. Intransitive meaning check oneself is from 1680s. Meaning make a
halt or stay, tarry is from 1711. Stop-light is from 1922; stop-sign is from 1918. Stop-motion is
from 1851, originally of looms. Related: Stopped; stopping.


