tart (n.2)

1887, prostitute, immoral woman, from earlier use as a term of endearment to a girl or woman (1864),
sometimes said to be a shortening of sweetheart. But another theory traces it to jam-tart (see tart
(n.1)), which was British slang early 19c. for attractive woman. Diminutive tartlet attested from
1890. To tart (something) up is from 1938. Related: Tarted.


tart (n.1)

small pie, late 14c., from Old French tarte flat, open-topped pastry (13c.), possibly an alteration
of torte, from Late Latin torta round loaf of bread (in Medieval Latin a cake, tart), perhaps from
past participle of torquere to twist.


tart (adj.)

having a sharp taste, 1520s, also attested once, obscurely, from late 14c., perhaps from Old English
teart painful, sharp, severe, rough (in reference to punishment, pain, suffering), from Germanic
*ter-t-, from PIE *der- (2) to split, flay, peel (see tear (v.1)), but the gap in the record is
unexplained. Figurative use, with reference to words, speech, etc., is attested from c.1600.
Related: Tartly; tartness, both also absent in Middle English.


torte (n.)

sweet cake, tart, 1748, from German Torte; earlier sense of round cake, round bread (1550s) is from
Middle French torte; both are from Late Latin torta flat cake, also round loaf of bread (also source
of Italian torte, Spanish torta), probably related to tart (n.1). Not considered to be from the
source of tort.


flan (n.)

open tart, 1846, from French flan custard tart, cheesecake, from Old French flaon (12c.), from
Medieval Latin flado, probably a Germanic borrowing (compare Frankish *flado, Old High German flado
offering cake, Middle High German vlade a broad, thin cake, Dutch vla baked custard), from Proto-
Germanic *flatho(n), akin to words for flat and probably from PIE root *plat- to spread (see place).
Borrowed earlier as flawn (c.1300), from Old French.


sour (adj.)

Old English sur sour, tart, acid, fermented, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates: Old Norse
surr, Middle Dutch suur, Dutch zuur, Old High German sur, German Sauer), from PIE root *suro- sour,
salty, bitter (cognates: Old Church Slavonic syru, Russian syroi moist, raw; Lithuanian suras salty,
suris cheese).    Meaning having a peevish disposition is from early 13c. Sense in whisky sour
(1885) is with lemon added (1862). Sour cream is attested from 1855. French sur sour, tart (12c.) is
a Germanic loan-word.


turnover (n.)

also turn-over, 1650s, action of turning over, from the verbal phrase; see turn (v.) + over (adv.).
As a kind of pastry tart, from 1798. Meaning number of employees leaving a place and being replaced
is recorded from 1955.


brusque (adj.)

1650s, from French brusque lively, fierce, from Italian adjective brusco sharp, tart, rough, perhaps
from Vulgar Latin *bruscum butcher's broom plant.


Linzertorte (n.)

1906, from German Linzertorte, from Linzer (adj.) of Linz, city in Austria, + torte tart. The city
name probably is ultimately from the Germanic root for lime tree.


dart (n.)

early 14c., from Old French dart throwing spear, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *darothuz cognates: Old
English daro&eth;, Old High German tart, Old Norse darra&thorn;r dart). Italian and Spanish dardo
are said to be from Germanic by way of Old Proven&ccedil;al.


tortilla (n.)

1690s, from American Spanish tortilla, from Spanish, a tart, literally a little cake, diminutive of
torta cake, from Late Latin torta flat cake (see torte).


custard (n.)

mid-14c., meat or fruit pie, crustade, from Middle French croustade (Modern French coutarde), from
Old Proven&ccedil;al croustado fruit tart, literally something covered with crust, from crosta
crust, from Latin crusta (see crust (n.)). Modern meaning is c.1600. Spelling change perhaps by
influence of mustard.


austere (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French austere (Modern French aust&egrave;re) and directly from Latin austerus
dry, harsh, sour, tart, from Greek austeros bitter, harsh, especially making the tongue dry
(originally used of fruits, wines), metaphorically austere, harsh, from PIE *saus- dry (cognates:
Greek auos dry, auein to dry). Use in English is figurative: stern, severe, very simple. Related:
Austerely.


acerbity (n.)

1570s, from Middle French acerbit&eacute;, from Latin acerbitatem (nominative acerbitas) harshness,
sharpness, bitterness, from acerbus bitter to taste, sharp, sour, tart (related to acer sharp;
compare Latin superbus haughty, from super above), from Proto-Italic *akro-po- sharp, from PIE *ak-
sharp (see acrid). Earliest use in English is figurative, of sharp and bitter persons. Of tastes,
from 1610s.


pizza (n.)

1935, from Italian pizza, originally cake, tart, pie, of uncertain origin. The 1907 Vocabolario
Etimologico della Lingua Italiana reports it is said to be from dialectal pinza clamp (from Latin
pinsere to pound, stamp). Klein suggests a connection via loan-translation with Medieval Greek pitta
cake, pie, from Greek pitta pitch (cognate with Latin adjective piceus of pitch). See also pita.


slow (adj.)

Old English slaw inactive, sluggish, torpid, lazy, also not clever, from Proto-Germanic
*sl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old Saxon sleu blunt, dull, Middle Dutch slee, Dutch sleeuw sour, tart,
blunt, Old High German sleo blunt, dull, Old Norse sljor, Danish sl&oslash;v, Swedish sl&ouml;
blunt, dull). Meaning taking a long time is attested from early 13c. Meaning dull, tedious is from
1841. As an adverb c.1500. The slows imaginary disease to account for lethargy is from 1843.


raspberry (n.)

1620s, earlier raspis berry (1540s), possibly from  raspise a sweet rose-colored wine (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-Latin vinum raspeys, origin uncertain, as is the connection between this and Old French
raspe, Medieval Latin raspecia, raspeium, also meaning raspberry. One suggestion is via Old Walloon
raspoie thicket, of Germanic origin. Klein suggests it is via the French word, from a Germanic
source akin to English rasp (v.), with an original sense of rough berry, based on appearance.    A
native plant of Europe and Asiatic Russia, the name was applied to a similar vine in North America.
Meaning rude sound (1890) is shortening of raspberry tart, rhyming slang for fart.


