taunt (n.)

1520s, bitter invective, probably from taunt (v.).


taunt (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in tauntingly), possibly [Skeat] from Middle French tanter, tenter to tempt, try,
provoke, variant of tempter to try (see tempt). Or from Middle French tant pour tant so much for so
much, tit for tat, on notion of sarcastic rejoinder (considered by OED the most likely suggestion).
Related: Taunted; taunting.


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


scout (v.2)

to reject with scorn, 1710, earlier to mock (c.1600), of Scandinavian origin (compare Old Norse
skuta, skute to taunt), probably from a source related to shout (v.). Related: Scouted; scouting;
scoutingly.


shout (v.)

c.1300, schowten to call or cry out loudly, of unknown origin; perhaps from the root of shoot (v.)
on the notion of throw the voice out loudly, or related to Old Norse skuta a taunt (compare scout
(v.2)). Related: Shouted; shouting.


fear (v.)

Old English f&aelig;ran terrify, frighten, originally transitive (sense preserved in archaic I fear
me and somewhat revived in digital gaming). Meaning feel fear is late 14c. Cognate with Old Saxon
faron to lie in wait, Middle Dutch vaeren to fear, Old High German faren to plot against, Old Norse
f&aelig;ra to taunt. See fear (n.). Related: Feared; fearing.


sarcasm (n.)

1570s, sarcasmus, from Late Latin sarcasmus, from late Greek sarkasmos a sneer, jest, taunt,
mockery, from sarkazein to speak bitterly, sneer, literally to strip off the flesh, from sarx
(genitive sarkos) flesh, properly piece of meat, from PIE root *twerk- to cut (cognates: Avestan
thwares to cut). Current form of the English word is from 1610s. For nuances of usage, see humor.


opprobrious (adj.)

full of reproach, intended to bring disgrace, late 14c., from Old French oprobrieus (Modern French
opprobrieux), or directly from Late Latin opprobriosus, from Latin opprobare to reproach, taunt,
from ob against (see ob-) + probrum reproach, infamy. Etymological sense is disgrace attached to
conduct considered shameful. Related: Opprobriously; opprobriousness.


sycophant (n.)

1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), informer, talebearer, slanderer, from Middle French sycophante and
directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantes false accuser, slanderer, literally one who
shows the fig, from sykon fig (see fig) + phainein to show (see phantasm). Showing the fig was a
vulgar gesture made by sticking the thumb between two fingers, a display which vaguely resembles a
fig, itself symbolic of a vagina (sykon also meant vulva). The modern accepted explanation is that
prominent politicians in ancient Greece held aloof from such inflammatory gestures, but privately
urged their followers to taunt their opponents. The sense of mean, servile flatterer is first
recorded in English 1570s.    The explanation, long current, that it orig. meant an informer against
the unlawful exportation of figs cannot be substantiated. [OED]


