tauten (v.)

to make taut, 1814, from taut + -en (1). Intransitive meaning become taut is from 1849. Related:
Tautened; tautening.


tautog (n.)

edible marine fish of the Atlantic coast of North America, 1640s, from Narragansett tautauog, plural
of taut. Translated by Roger Williams as sheep's head.


taut (adj.)

mid-13c., tohte stretched or pulled tight, possibly from tog-, past participle stem of Old English
teon to pull, drag, from Proto-Germanic *tugn, from PIE *deuk- to lead (see duke (n.)), which would
connect it to tow (v.) and tie. Related: Tautness.


clothes-line (n.)

also clothesline, 1830, from clothes + line (n.). As a kind of high tackle in U.S. football (the
effect is similar to running into a taut clothesline) attested by 1970; as a verb in this sense by
1959.


taught

past tense of teach (v.), from Old English tahte, past tense of t&aelig;can. For the unrelated
adjective meaning stretched or pulled tight, see taut.


tone (n.)

mid-14c., musical sound or note, from Old French ton musical sound, speech, words (13c.) and
directly from Latin tonus a sound, tone, accent, literally stretching (in Medieval Latin, a term
peculiar to music), from Greek tonos vocal pitch, raising of voice, accent, key in music, originally
a stretching, tightening, taut string, related to teinein to stretch (see tenet). Sense of manner of
speaking is from c.1600. First reference to firmness of body is from 1660s. As prevailing state of
manners from 1735; as style in speaking or writing which reveals attitude from 1765. Tone-deaf is
from 1880; tone-poem from 1845.


strain (v.)

c.1300, tie, bind, fasten, gird, from present participle stem of Old French estreindre bind tightly,
clasp, squeeze, from Latin stringere (2) draw tight, bind tight, compress, press together, from PIE
root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Lithuanian stregti congeal, freeze, become stiff;
Greek strangein twist; Old High German strician mends nets; Old English streccian to stretch; German
stramm, Dutch stram stiff).    From late 14c. as tighten; make taut, also exert oneself; overexert
(a body part), Sense of press through a filter, put (a liquid) through a strainer is from early 14c.
(implied in strainer); that of to stress beyond measure, carry too far, make a forced interpretation
of is from mid-15c. Related: Strained; straining.


string (n.)

Old English streng line, cord, thread, string of a bow or harp, in plural tackle, rigging; lineage,
race, from Proto-Germanic *strangiz (cognates: Old Norse strengr, Danish streng, Middle Dutch
strenge, Dutch streng, Old High German strang, German Strang rope, cord), from *strang- taut, stiff,
from PIE root *strenk- tight, narrow. Gradually restricted by early Middle English to lines that are
smaller than a rope. Sense of a number of objects arranged in a line first recorded late 15c.    Old
English meaning ligaments, tendons is preserved in hamstring, heartstrings. Meaning limitations,
stipulations (1888) is American English, probably from the common April Fool's joke of leaving a
purse that appears to be full of money on the sidewalk, then tugging it away with an attached string
when someone stoops to pick it up.    To pull strings control the course of affairs (1860) is from
the notion of puppet theater. First string, second string, etc. in athletics (1863) is from archers'
custom of carrying spare bowstrings in the event that one breaks. Strings stringed instruments is
attested from mid-14c. String bean is from 1759; string bikini is from 1974.


