tawdry (adj.)

no longer fresh or elegant but worn as if it were so; in cheap and ostentatious imitation of what is
rich or costly, 1670s, adjective use of noun tawdry silk necktie for women (1610s), shortened from
tawdry lace (1540s), an alteration (with adhesion of the -t- from Saint) of St. Audrey's lace, a
necktie or ribbon sold at the annual fair at Ely on Oct. 17 commemorating St. Audrey (queen of
Northumbria, died 679). Her association with lace necklaces is that she supposedly died of a throat
tumor, which, according to Bede, she considered God's punishment for her youthful stylishness.
Related: Tawdriness.    I know of a surety that I deservedly bear the weight of my trouble on my
neck, for I remember that, when I was a young maiden, I bore on it the needless weight of necklaces;
and therefore I believe the Divine goodness would have me endure the pain in my neck, that so I may
be absolved from the guilt of my needless levity, having now, instead of gold and pearls, the fiery
heat of a tumour rising on my neck. [A.M. Sellar translation, 1907]


two bits (n.)

quarter dollar, 1730, in reference to the Mexican real, a large coin that was divided into eight
bits; see bit (n.1). Compare piece of eight (see piece (n.)). Two bits thus would have equaled a
quarter of the coin. Hence two-bit (adj.) cheap, tawdry, first recorded 1929.


tacky (adj.2)

in poor taste, 1888, from earlier sense of shabby, seedy (1862), adjectival use of tackey (n.) ill-
fed or neglected horse (1800), later extended to persons in like condition, hillbilly, cracker
(1888), of uncertain origin. Related: Tackiness.    The word tacky is a Southern colloquialism. It
was coined by a wealthier or more refined and educated class for general application to those who
were not sheltered by the branches of a family tree, who were tainted. Those who were wealthy and
yet had no great-grandfathers were tackies. The word was used both in contempt and in derision. It
is now nearly obsolete in both senses. There are no aristocrats in the South now, and therefore no
tackies. No man who has the instincts of a gentleman is spoken of as a tacky, whether he can
remember the name of his grandfather's uncle or not. But it has its uses. It is employed in
describing persons of low ideas and vulgar manners, whether rich or poor. It may mean an absence of
style. In dress, anything that is tawdry is tacky. A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain
in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be tacky, because it is
cheap and yet pretentious. In Louisiana the inferior grade of Creole ponies are known as tackies.
[Horace Ingraham, Charleston, S.C., in American Notes and Queries, Feb. 15, 1890]


