tawny (adj.)

tan-colored, late 14c., from Anglo-French taun&eacute; of or like the brownish-yellow of tanned
leather, from Old French tan&eacute;t dark brown, tan (12c., Modern French tann&#233;), past
participle of taner to tan hides, from Medieval Latin tannare (see tan (v.)).Related: Tawniness.


cirrhosis (n.)

1827, coined in Modern Latin by French physician Ren&eacute;-Th&eacute;ophile-Hyacinthe Laennec
(1781-1826) with -osis and Greek kirrhos tawny, of unknown origin. So called for the orange-yellow
appearance of the diseased liver. Related: Cirrhotic.


tan (v.)

late Old English tannian to convert hide into leather (by steeping it in tannin), from Medieval
Latin tannare tan, dye a tawny color (c.900), from tannum crushed oak bark, used in tanning leather,
probably from a Celtic source (such as Breton tann oak tree). The meaning make brown by exposure to
the sun (as tanning does to hides) first recorded 1520s; intransitive sense also from 1520s. Of
persons, not considered an attractive feature until 20c.; in Shakespeare, to deprive of the
freshness and beauty of youth (Sonnet CXV). As an adjective from 1620s. To tan (someone's) hide in
the figurative sense is from 1660s. Related: Tanned; tanning. German Tanne fir tree (as in
Tannenbaum) might be a transferred meaning from the same Celtic source.


fallow (adj.)

pale yellow, brownish yellow, Old English fealu reddish yellow, yellowish-brown, tawny, dusk-
colored, from Proto-Germanic *falwa- (cognates: Old Saxon falu, Old Norse f&ouml;lr, Middle Dutch
valu, Dutch vaal, Old High German falo, German falb), from PIE *pal-wo- dark-colored, gray
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic plavu, Lithuanian palvas sallow; Greek polios, Sanskrit palitah,
Welsh llwyd gray; Latin pallere to be pale), suffixed form of root *pel- (2) pale (see pallor). It
also forms the root of words for pigeon in Greek (peleia), Latin (palumbes), and Old Prussian
(poalis).


Chloe

fem. proper name, Latin, from Greek Khloe, literally young green shoot; related to khloros greenish-
yellow, from PIE *ghlo- variant of root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright
materials and gold, and bile or gall (such as Latin helvus yellowish, bay, Gallo-Latin gilvus light
bay; Lithuanian geltonas yellow; Old Church Slavonic zlutu, Polish &#380;&oacute;&#322;ty, Russian
zeltyj yellow; Sanskrit harih yellow, tawny yellow, hiranyam gold; Avestan zari yellow; Old English
geolu, geolwe, Modern English yellow, German gelb yellow) and green (such as Latin galbus greenish-
yellow; Greek khloros greenish-yellow color, kholos bile; Lithuanian zalias green, zelvas greenish;
Old Church Slavonic zelenu, Polish zielony, Russian zelenyj green; Old Irish glass, Welsh and Breton
glas green, also gray, blue).    Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is perhaps
because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to
yellow. It is possible that this whole group of yellow-green words is related to PIE root *ghlei- to
shine, glitter, glow, be warm (see gleam (n.)).


