technology (n.)

1610s, a discourse or treatise on an art or the arts, from Greek tekhnologia systematic treatment of
an art, craft, or technique, originally referring to grammar, from tekhno- (see techno-) + -logy.
The meaning study of mechanical and industrial arts (Century Dictionary, 1902, gives examples of
spinning, metal-working, or brewing) is first recorded 1859. High technology attested from 1964;
short form high-tech is from 1972.


biotechnology (n.)

also bio-technology, 1947, use of machinery in relation to human needs; 1972 in sense of use of
biological processes in industrial production, from bio- + technology.


technological (adj.)

1620s, in reference to terminology, from technology + -ical. Meaning of or relating to technology
from 1800. Related: Technologically.


technologist (n.)

one versed in technology, 1803, from technology + -ist.


techie (n.)

one well-versed in the latest technology, by 1984.


grok (v.)

to understand empathically, 1961, arbitrary formation by U.S. science fiction writer Robert A.
Heinlein (1907-1988) in his book Stranger in a Strange Land. In popular use 1960s; perhaps obsolete
now except in internet technology circles.


Jacquard

1841, from Joseph Marie Jacquard (1752-1834) of Lyons, inventor of new weaving technology c.1800.


television (n.)

1907, as a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires; formed in
English or borrowed from French t&eacute;l&eacute;vision, from tele- + vision.    Television is not
impossible in theory. In practice it would be very costly without being capable of serious
application. But we do not want that. On that day when it will be possible to accelerate our methods
of telephotography by at least ten times, which does not appear to be impossible in the future, we
shall arrive at television with a hundred telegraph wires. Then the problem of sight at a distance
will without doubt cease to be a chimera. [Telegraphing Pictures in Windsor Magazine, 1907]    Other
proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were
telephote (1880) and televista (1904). The technology was developed in the 1920s and '30s. Nativized
in German as Fernsehen. Shortened form TV is from 1948. Meaning a television set is from 1941.
Meaning television as a medium is from 1927.  Television is the first truly democratic culture --
the first culture available to everyone and entirely governed by what the people want. The most
terrifying thing is what people do want. [Clive Barnes, New York Times, Dec. 30, 1969]


Freon (n.)

refrigerant chemical, 1932, proprietary name in U.S. for fluorocarbons used in refrigeration
technology. The name was apparently constructed from fre(eze) + -on used as an arbitrary suffix
[Flood].


MIT

originally M.I.T., abbreviation of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, attested from 1892.


nanotechnology (n.)

by 1974, from nano- + technology.


boilerplate (n.)

newspaper (and now information technology) slang for unit of writing that can be used over and over
without change, 1893, from a literal meaning (1840) metal rolled in large, flat plates for use in
making steam boilers. The connecting notion is probably of sturdiness or reusability. From 1890s to
1950s, publicity items were cast or stamped in metal ready for the printing press and distributed to
newspapers as filler. The largest supplier was Western Newspaper Union.


Luddite (n.)

also luddite, 1811, from name taken by an organized band of weavers who destroyed machinery in
Midlands and northern England 1811-16 for fear it would deprive them of work. Supposedly from Ned
Ludd, a Leicestershire worker who in 1779 had done the same before through insanity (but that story
first was told in 1847). Applied to modern rejecters of automation and technology from at least
1961. As an adjective from 1812.


Warfarin (n.)

1950, from WARF, acronym from Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation + -arin, from Coumarin. The
organization describes itself as an independent, nonprofit foundation chartered to support research
at the U[niversity of] W[isconsin]-Madison and the designated technology transfer organization for
the university.


amplify (v.)

early 15c., to enlarge or expand, from Middle French amplifier, from Latin amplificare to enlarge,
from amplificus splendid, from amplus large (see ample) + the root of facere make, do (see
factitious). Meaning augment in volume or amount is from 1570s. Restriction of use to sound seems to
have emerged in the electronic age, c.1915, in reference to radio technology.


information (n.)

late 14c., act of informing, from Old French informacion, enformacion information, advice,
instruction, from Latin informationem (nominative informatio) outline, concept, idea, noun of action
from past participle stem of informare (see inform). Meaning knowledge communicated is from mid-15c.
Information technology attested from 1958. Information revolution from 1969.


hacker (n.)

a chopper, cutter, perhaps also one who makes hacking tools, early 13c. (as a surname), agent noun
from hack (v.1). Meaning one who gains unauthorized access to computer records is attested by 1983,
agent noun from hack (v.2). Said to be from slightly earlier tech slang sense of one who works like
a hack at writing and experimenting with software, one who enjoys computer programming for its own
sake, 1976, reputedly a usage that evolved at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (however an MIT
student from the late 1960s recalls hack (n.) being used then and there in the general sense of
creative prank, which clouds its sense connection with the writing for hire word, and there may be a
source or an influence here in hack (v.1)).


techno-

word-forming element meaning art, craft, skill, later technical, technology, from Latinized form of
Greek tekhno-, combining form of tekhne art, skill, craft in work; method, system, an art, a system
or method of making or doing, from PIE *teks-na- craft (of weaving or fabricating), from suffixed
form of root *teks- to weave, fabricate, make (cognates: Sanskrit taksan carpenter, Greek tekton
carpenter, Latin texere to weave; see texture (n.)).


post-modern (adj.)

also post-modern, post modern, by 1919, in frequent use from 1949, from post- + modern.    But it
has been only during the later decades of the modern era -- during that time interval that might
fairly be called the post-modern era -- that this mechanistic conception of things has begun
seriously to affect the current system of knowledge and belief; and it has not hitherto seriously
taken effect except in technology and in the material sciences. [Thorstein Veblen, The Vested
Interests and the Common Man, 1919]   <hr />   So much for the misapplied theory which has helped
set the artist's nerves a-quiver and incited him to the extremes of post modern art, literary and
other. [Wilson Follett, Literature and Bad Nerves, Harper's, June 1921]    Of architecture from
1940s; specific sense in the arts emerged 1960s (see postmodernism).


strip (v.)

make bare, early 13c., from Old English -striepan, -strypan to plunder, despoil (as in West Saxon
bestrypan to plunder), from Proto-Germanic *straupijan (cognates: Middle Dutch stropen to strip off,
to ramble about plundering, Old High German stroufen to strip off, plunder, German streifen strip
off, touch upon, to ramble, roam, rove). Meaning to unclothe is recorded from early 13c.
Intransitive sense from late 14c. Of screw threads, from 1839; of gear wheels, from 1873. Meaning
perform a strip-tease is from 1929. Related: Stripped; stripping. Strip poker is attested from 1916,
in a joke in The Technology Monthly and Harvard Engineering Journal:    Say, Bill how, did the game
come out?  It ended in a tie.  Oh, were you playing strip poker?    strip search is from 1947, in
reference to World War II prison camps.


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


geek (n.)

sideshow freak, 1916, U.S. carnival and circus slang, perhaps a variant of geck a fool, dupe,
simpleton (1510s), apparently from Low German geck, from an imitative verb found in North Sea
Germanic and Scandinavian meaning to croak, cackle, and also to mock, cheat. The modern form and the
popular use with reference to circus sideshow wild men is from 1946, in William Lindsay Gresham's
novel Nightmare Alley (made into a film in 1947 starring Tyrone Power).    An ordinary geek doesn't
actually eat snakes, just bites off chunks of 'em, chicken heads and rats. [Arthur H. Lewis,
Carnival, 1970]    By c.1983, used in teenager slang in reference to peers who lacked social graces
but were obsessed with new technology and computers (such as the Anthony Michael Hall character in
1984's Sixteen Candles).   <b>geek out</b> vi. To temporarily enter techno-nerd mode while in a non-
hackish context, for example at parties held near computer equipment. [Eric S. Raymond, The New
Hacker's Dictionary, 1996]


gun (n.)

mid-14c., gunne an engine of war that throws rocks, arrows or other missiles, probably a shortening
of woman's name Gunilda, found in Middle English gonnilde cannon and in an Anglo-Latin reference to
a specific gun from a 1330 munitions inventory of Windsor Castle (...una magna balista de cornu quae
Domina Gunilda ...), from Old Norse Gunnhildr, woman's name, from gunnr + hildr, both meaning war,
battle. First element from PIE *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane); for second, see Hilda.    The
identification of women with powerful weapons is common historically (such as Big Bertha, Brown
Bess, Mons Meg, etc.); meaning shifted with technology, from cannons to firearms as they developed
15c. Great guns (cannon, etc.) distinguished from small guns (such as muskets) from c.1400. Applied
to pistols and revolvers after 1744. Meaning thief, rascal is from 1858. For son of a gun, see son.
To jump the gun (1912, American English) is from track and field. Guns a woman's breasts (especially
if prominent) attested by 2006.


