temper (n.)

late 14c., due proportion of elements or qualities, from temper (v.). The sense of characteristic
state of mind, inclination, disposition is first recorded 1590s; that of calm state of mind,
tranquility in c.1600; and that of angry state of mind (for bad temper) in 1828. Meaning degree of
hardness and resiliency in steel is from late 15c.


tempera (n.)

also tempra, 1832, from Italian tempera (in phrase pingere a tempera), back-formation from temperare
to mix colors, temper, from Latin temperare to mix in due proportion (see temper (v.)).


tempered (adj.)

1650s, brought to desired hardness (of metals, especially steel), past participle adjective from
temper (v.). Meaning toned down by admixture is from 1650s; of music or musical instruments, tuned,
from 1727.


temperament (n.)

late 14c., proportioned mixture of elements, from Latin temperamentum proper mixture, a mixing in
due proportion, from temperare to mix (see temper (v.)). In medieval theory, it meant a combination
of qualities (hot, cold, moist, dry) that determined the nature of an organism; thus also a
combination of the four humors (sanguine, choleric, phlegmatic, and melancholic) that made up a
person's characteristic disposition. General sense of habit of mind, natural disposition is from
1821.


temperate (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, modest, forbearing, self-restrained, not swayed by passion; of climates or
seasons, not liable to excessive heat or cold, from Latin temperatus restrained, regulated, limited,
moderate, sober, calm, steady, from past participle of temperare to moderate, regulate (see temper
(v.)). Related: Temperately; temperateness. Temperate zone is attested from 1550s.


temperature (n.)

mid-15c., fact of being tempered, proper proportion; 1530s, character or nature of a substance, from
Latin temperatura a tempering, moderation, from temperatus, past participle of temperare to be
moderate; to mingle in due proportion (see temper (v.)). Sense of degree of heat or cold first
recorded 1670 (Boyle), from Latin temperatura, used in this sense by Galileo. Meaning fever, high
temperature is attested from 1898.


temperance (n.)

mid-14c., self-restraint, moderation, from Anglo-French temperaunce (mid-13c.), from Latin
temperantia moderation, sobriety, discretion, self-control, from temperans, present participle of
temperare to moderate (see temper (v.)). Latin temperantia was used by Cicero to translate Greek
sophrosyne moderation. In English, temperance was used to render Latin continentia or abstinentia,
specifically in reference to drinking alcohol and eating; hence by early 1800s it had come to mean
abstinence from alcoholic drink.


temper (v.)

late Old English temprian to moderate, bring to a proper or suitable state, to modify some excessive
quality, to restrain within due limits, from Latin temperare observe proper measure, be moderate,
restrain oneself, also transitive, mix correctly, mix in due proportion; regulate, rule, govern,
manage, usually described as from tempus time, season (see temporal), with a sense of proper time or
season. Meaning to make (steel) hard and elastic is from late 14c. Sense of to tune the pitch of a
musical instrument is recorded from c.1300. Related: Tempered; tempering.


nettle (v.)

c.1400, to beat with nettles, from nettle (n.). Figurative sense of irritate, provoke is from 1560s.
Related: Nettled; nettling.    Nettled. Teized, provoked, out of temper. He or she has pissed on a
nettle; said of one who is pevish or out of temper. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


spleen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French esplen, from Latin splen, from Greek splen the milt, spleen, from PIE
*spelgh- spleen, milt (cognates: Sanskrit plihan-, Avestan sperezan, Armenian p'aicaln, Latin lien,
Old Church Slavonic slezena, Lithuanian blu&#382;nis, Old Prussian blusne, Old Irish selg spleen).
Regarded in medieval physiology as the seat of morose feelings and bad temper. Hence figurative
sense of violent ill-temper (1580s, implied in spleenful); and thence spleenless free from anger,
ill-humor, malice, or spite (1610s).


tiff (n.)

1727, outburst of temper, later petty quarrel (1754), of uncertain origin; OED suggests imitative,
from the sound of a slight puff of air or gas.


snit (n.)

state of agitation, fit of temper, 1939, American English, of unknown origin. First in Claire
Boothe's Kiss the Boys Good-bye, which gives it a U.S. Southern context.


Toledo

city in Spain, famous from 16c. for its sword-blades of fine temper; the place name is Celtic, from
tol hill.


bilbo (n.)

kind of sword noted for temper and elasticity, 1590s, from Bilbao, town in northern Spain where
swords were made, in English Bilboa. The town name is Roman Bellum Vadum beautiful ford (over the
Nervion River).


tamper (v.)

meddle, interfere, 1560s, figurative use of tamper to work in clay, etc., so as to mix it
thoroughly, probably originally a variant of temper (v.), which is how it often was spelled at
first. Perhaps it is a dialectal workmen's pronunciation. Related: Tampered; tampering.


dander (n.)

1831, American English, temper, of unknown origin; perhaps originally from figurative use of West
Indies dander, dunder fermentation of sugar, from Spanish redundar to overflow, from Latin redundare
(see redundant).


untempered (adj.)

mid-15c., not properly mixed, undiluted, from un- (1) not + past participle of temper (v.). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch ongetempert, Middle High German ungetempert. Earlier as unrestrained (late
14c.), also, of a musical instrument, not properly tuned; meaning unhardened is from 1820.


choler (n.)

late 14c., bile, as one of the humors, supposed to cause irascibility or temper, from Old French
colere bile, anger, from Late Latin cholera bile (see cholera).


inflexible (adj.)

late 14c., incapable of being bent, physically rigid, also figuratively, unbending in temper or
purpose, from Middle French inflexible and directly from Latin inflexibilis, from inflexus, past
participle of inflectere (see inflect). In early 15c. an identical word had an opposite sense,
capable of being swayed or moved, from in- in, on. Related: Inflexibly.


distemper (v.)

mid-14c., to disturb, from Old French destemprer, from Medieval Latin distemperare vex, make ill,
literally upset the proper balance (of bodily humors), from dis- un-, not (see dis-) + Latin
temperare mingle in the proper proportion (see temper (v.)). Related: Distempered.


frumpy (adj.)

1746, cross-tempered, from frump (n.) bad temper (1660s) and an earlier verb meaning to mock,
browbeat (1550s), of obscure origin, perhaps imitative of a sneer or derisive snort. Sense of sour-
looking, unfashionable is from 1825, but this may be a shortening of frumple to wrinkle, crumple
(late 14c.), from Middle Dutch verrompelen, from ver- completely + rompelen to rumple. Related:
Frumps. See also frump.


acrimony (n.)

1540s, quality of being acrid, from Middle French acrimonie or directly from Latin acrimonia
sharpness, pungency of taste, figuratively acrimony, severity, energy, from acer sharp (fem. acris,
neuter acre; see acrid) + -monia suffix of action, state, condition. Figurative extension to
sharpness of temper is first recorded 1610s.


attemper (v.)

late 14c., from Old French attemprer, from Latin attemperare, from ad- to (see ad-) + temperare (see
temper (v.)). Related: Attempered; attempering.


moderate (adj.)

late 14c., originally of weather and other physical conditions, from Latin moderatus within bounds,
observing moderation; figuratively modest, restrained, past participle of moderari to regulate,
mitigate, restrain, temper, set a measure, keep (something) within measure, related to modus
measure, from PIE *med-es-, from base *med- (see medical (adj.)). The notion is keeping within due
measure. In English, of persons from early 15c.; of opinions from 1640s; of prices from 1904.
Related: Moderateness.


equanimity (n.)

c.1600, fairness, impartiality, from French &eacute;quanimit&eacute;, from Latin aequanimitatem
(nominative aequanimitas) evenness of mind, calmness, from aequus even, level (see equal (adj.)) +
animus mind, spirit (see animus). Meaning evenness of temper in English is from 1610s.


mollify (v.)

late 14c., to soften (a substance), from Old French mollifier or directly from Late Latin
mollificare make soft, mollify from mollificus softening, from Latin mollis soft (see melt (v.)) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Transferred sense of soften in temper, appease, pacify is
recorded from early 15c. Related: Mollified; mollifying.


courage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corage (12c., Modern French courage) heart, innermost feelings; temper, from
Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin cor heart (see
heart) which remains a common metaphor for inner strength.    In Middle English, used broadly for
what is in one's mind or thoughts, hence bravery, but also wrath, pride, confidence, lustiness, or
any sort of inclination. Replaced Old English ellen, which also meant zeal, strength.


bonhomie (n.)

good nature, 1803, from French bonhomie good nature, easy temper, from bonhomme good man (with
unusual loss of -m-), from bon good (see bon) + homme man, from Latin homo (see homunculus).


Irish (n.)

c.1200, Irisce, from stem of Old English Iras inhabitant of Ireland, from Old Norse irar, ultimately
from Old Irish Eriu (accusative Eirinn, Erinn) Erin, which is from Old Celtic *Iveriu (accusative
*Iverionem, ablative *Iverione), perhaps from PIE *pi-wer- fertile, literally fat, from root *peie-
to be fat, swell (see fat (adj.)).    Meaning temper, passion is 1834, American English (first
attested in writings of Davy Crockett), from the legendary pugnacity of Irish people. Irish-American
is from 1832; Irish stew is attested from 1814; Irish coffee is from 1950. Wild Irish (late 14c.)
originally were those not under English rule; Black Irish in reference to those of Mediterranean
appearance is from 1888.


mannequin (n.)

1902, model to display clothes, from French mannequin (15c.), from Dutch manneken (see manikin). A
French form of the same word that yielded manikin, and sometimes mannequin was used in English in a
sense artificial man (especially in translations of Hugo). Originally of persons, in a sense where
we might use model.    A mannequin is a good-looking, admirably formed young lady, whose mission is
to dress herself in her employer's latest creations, and to impart to them the grace which only
perfect forms can give. Her grammar may be bad, and her temper worse, but she must have the chic the
Parisienne possesses, no matter whether she hails from the aristocratic Faubourg St. Germain or from
the Faubourg Montmartre. [The Bystander, Aug. 15, 1906]    Later (by 1939) of artificial model
figures to display clothing.


animus (n.)

1820, temper (usually in a hostile sense), from Latin animus rational soul, mind, life, mental
powers; courage, desire, related to anima living being, soul, mind, disposition, passion, courage,
anger, spirit, feeling, from PIE root *ane- to blow, to breathe (cognates: Greek anemos wind,
Sanskrit aniti breathes, Old Irish anal, Welsh anadl breath, Old Irish animm soul, Gothic uzanan to
exhale, Old Norse anda to breathe, Old English e&eth;ian to breathe, Old Church Slavonic vonja
smell, breath, Armenian anjn soul). It has no plural. As a term in Jungian psychology for the
masculine component of a feminine personality, it dates from 1923.


ginger (n.)

mid-14c., from Old English gingifer, from Medieval Latin gingiber, from Latin zingiberi, from Greek
zingiberis, from Prakrit (Middle Indic) singabera, from Sanskrit srngaveram, from srngam horn +
vera- body, so called from the shape of its root. But this may be Sanskrit folk etymology, and the
word may be from an ancient Dravidian name that also produced the Malayalam name for the spice,
inchi-ver, from inchi root. See gin (v.). The word apparently was readopted in Middle English from
Old French gingibre (Modern French gingembre). Meaning spirit, spunk, temper is from 1843, American
English. Ginger-ale recorded by 1822; ginger-snap as a type of cookie is from 1855, American
English.


ceiling (n.)

mid-14c., celynge, act of paneling a room, noun formed (with -ing) from Middle English verb ceil put
a cover or ceiling over, later cover (walls) with wainscoting, panels, etc. (early 15c.); probably
from Middle French celer to conceal, also cover with paneling (12c.), from Latin celare (see cell).
Probably influenced by Latin caelum heaven, sky (see celestial).    Extended to the paneling itself
from late 14c. The meaning top surface of a room is attested by 1530s. Figurative sense upper limit
is from 1934. Colloquial figurative phrase hit the ceiling lose one's temper, get explosively angry
attested by 1908; earlier it meant to fail (by 1900, originally U.S. college slang). Glass ceiling
in the figurative sense of invisible barrier that prevents women from advancing in management, etc.,
is attested from 1988.


kike (n.)

derogatory slang for a Jew, by 1901, American English; early evidence supports the belief that it
was used at first among German-American Jews in reference to newcomers from Eastern Europe, perhaps
because the names of the latter ended in -ki or -ky.    There is no charity organization of any kind
here [a small city in Pennsylvania] and, what is sadder to relate, the Jews in this city will not
form one; that is, if the present temper of the people can be used as a criterion. The German Jews
are bitterly opposed to the Kikes, as they persist in calling the Russian Jews .... [Report of the
National Conference of Jewish Charities in the United States, Cleveland, 1912]    Philip Cowen,
first editor of The American Hebrew, suggests a source in Yiddish kikel circle. According to him,
Jewish immigrants, ignorant of writing with the Latin alphabet, signed their entry forms with a
circle, eschewing the X as a sign of Christianity. On this theory, Ellis Island immigration
inspectors began calling such people kikels, and the term shortened as it passed into general use.


lunatic (adj.)

late 13c., affected with periodic insanity, dependent on the changes of the moon, from Old French
lunatique, lunage insane, or directly from Late Latin lunaticus moon-struck, from Latin luna moon
(see Luna). Compare Old English monseoc lunatic, literally moon-sick; Middle High German lune humor,
temper, mood, whim, fancy (German Laune), from Latin luna. Compare also New Testament Greek
seleniazomai be epileptic, from selene moon. Lunatic fringe (1913) apparently was coined by U.S.
politician Theodore Roosevelt.    Then, among the wise and high-minded people who in self-respecting
and genuine fashion strive earnestly for peace, there are foolish fanatics always to be found in
such a movement and always discrediting it -- the men who form the lunatic fringe in all reform
movements. [Theodore Roosevelt, autobiography, 1913].    Earlier it was a term for a type of
hairstyle worn over the forehead (1877). Lunatic soup (1933) was Australian slang for alcoholic
drink.


short (adj.)

Old English sceort, scort short, not long, not tall; brief, probably from Proto-Germanic *skurta-
(cognates: Old Norse skorta to be short of, skort shortness; Old High German scurz short), from PIE
root *(s)ker- (1) to cut, with notion of something cut off (cognates: Sanskrit krdhuh shortened,
maimed, small; Latin curtus short, cordus late-born, originally stunted in growth; Old Church
Slavonic kratuku, Russian korotkij short; Lithuanian skurstu to be stunted, skardus steep; Old Irish
cert small, Middle Irish corr stunted, dwarfish).    Meaning having an insufficient quantity is from
1690s. Meaning rude is attested from late 14c. Meaning easily provoked is from 1590s; perhaps the
notion is of being not long in tolerating. Short fuse in figurative sense of quick temper first
attested 1968. To fall short is from archery. Short run relatively brief period of time is from
1879. Short story first recorded 1877. To make short work of dispose of quickly is first attested
1570s. Phrase short and sweet is from 1530s. To be short by the knees (1733) was to be kneeling; to
be short by the head (1540s) was to be beheaded.


wrong (adj.)

late Old English, twisted, crooked, wry, from Old Norse rangr, earlier *wrangr crooked, wry, wrong,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang- (cognates: Danish vrang crooked, wrong, Middle Dutch wranc, Dutch wrang
sour, bitter, literally that which distorts the mouth), from PIE *wrengh-, variant of *wergh- to
turn (see wring).    Sense of not right, bad, immoral, unjust developed by c.1300. Wrong thus is
etymologically a negative of right (adj.1), which is from Latin rectus, literally straight. Latin
pravus was literally crooked, but most commonly wrong, bad; and other words for crooked also have
meant wrong in Italian and Slavic. Compare French tort wrong, injustice, from Latin tortus twisted.
As an adverb from c.1200. Wrong-headed first recorded 1732. To get up on the wrong side (of the bed)
be in a bad mood is recorded from 1801, according to OED, from its supposed influence on one's
temper; it appears in Halliwell's Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words in 1846, but doesn't
seem to have been used much generally before late 1870s. To be on the wrong side of a given age,
older than, is from 1660s. Wrong side of the road (that reservbed for oncoming traffic) is by 1838.
To be from (or on) the wrong side of the tracks from the poor part of town is from 1921, American
English.


