temperamental (adj.)

of or pertaining to temperament, 1640s, from temperament + -al (1); in the sense of moody it is
recorded from 1907. Related: Temperamentally.


temperament (n.)

late 14c., proportioned mixture of elements, from Latin temperamentum proper mixture, a mixing in
due proportion, from temperare to mix (see temper (v.)). In medieval theory, it meant a combination
of qualities (hot, cold, moist, dry) that determined the nature of an organism; thus also a
combination of the four humors (sanguine, choleric, phlegmatic, and melancholic) that made up a
person's characteristic disposition. General sense of habit of mind, natural disposition is from
1821.


idiosyncrasy (n.)

c.1600, from French idiosyncrasie, from Greek idiosynkrasia a peculiar temperament, from idios one's
own (see idiom) + synkrasis temperament, mixture of personal characteristics, from syn together (see
syn-) + krasis mixture (see rare (adj.2)). Originally in English a medical term meaning physical
constitution of an individual. Mental sense first attested 1660s.


complexion (n.)

mid-14c., bodily constitution, from Old French complexion, complession combination of humors, hence
temperament, character, make-up, from Latin complexionem (nominative complexio) combination (in Late
Latin, physical constitution), from complexus (see complex (adj.)). Meaning appearance of the skin
of the face is first recorded mid-15c. In medieval physiology, the color of the face indicated
temperament or health.


biliary (adj.)

pertaining to bile, 1731, from French biliaire, from bile (see bile). Meaning bilious in mood or
temperament is recorded from 1837.


choleric (adj.)

mid-14c., colrik, bilious of temperament or complexion, from Old French colerique, from Late Latin
cholericus, from Greek kholerikos (see choler). Meaning easily angered, hot-tempered is from 1580s
(from the supposed effect of excess choler); that of pertaining to cholera is from 1834.


kidney (n.)

early 14c., of unknown origin, originally kidenere, perhaps a compound of Old English cwi&eth; womb
(see bowel) + ey egg (see egg (n.)) in reference to the shape of the organ. Figurative sense of
temperament is from 1550s. Kidney bean is from 1540s, so called for its shape.


disposition (n.)

late 14c., ordering, management, also tendency of mind, from Old French disposicion (12c.)
arrangement, order; mood, state of mind, from Latin dispositionem (nominative dispositio)
arrangement, management, noun of action from past participle stem of disponere to put in order,
arrange (see dispose). References to temperament (late 14c. in English) are from astrological use of
the word for position of a planet as a determining influence.


stable (adj.)

mid-12c., trustworthy, reliable; mid-13c., constant, steadfast; virtuous; from Old French stable,
estable constant, steadfast, unchanging, from Latin stabilis firm, steadfast, stable, fixed,
figuratively durable, unwavering, literally able to stand, from PIE *ste-dhli-, from root *sta- to
stand (see stet). From c.1300 as well-founded, well-established, secure (of governments, etc.).
Physical sense of secure against falling is recorded from late 14c.; also of even temperament. Of
nuclear isotopes, from 1904.


morale (n.)

1752, moral principles or practice, from French morale morality, good conduct, from fem. of Old
French moral moral (see moral (adj.)). Meaning confidence (especially in a military context) first
recorded 1831, from confusion with French moral (French distinguishes le moral temperament and la
morale morality).


quality (n.)

c.1300, temperament, character, disposition, from Old French qualite quality, nature, characteristic
(12c., Modern French qualit&eacute;), from Latin qualitatem (nominative qualitas) a quality,
property; nature, state, condition (said [Tucker, etc.] to have been coined by Cicero to translate
Greek poiotes), from qualis what kind of a, from PIE pronomial base *kwo- (see who).    Meaning
degree of goodness is late 14c. Meaning social rank, position is c.1400. Noun phrase quality time
first recorded 1977. Quality of life is from 1943. Quality control first attested 1935.


constitution (n.)

mid-14c., law, regulation, edict, from Old French constitucion (12c.) constitution, establishment,
and directly from Latin constitutionem (nominative constitutio) act of settling, settled condition,
anything arranged or settled upon, regulation, order, ordinance, from constitut-, past participle
stem of constituere (see constitute).    Meaning action of establishing is from 1580s; that of way
in which a thing is constituted is from c.1600; that of physical health, strength and vigor of the
body is from 1550s; of the mind, temperament, character from 1580s. Sense of mode of organization of
a state is from c.1600; that of system of principles by which a community is governed dates from
1730s; especially of a document of written laws since the U.S. and French constitutions, late 18c.


moral (adj.)

mid-14c., pertaining to character or temperament (good or bad), from Old French moral (14c.) and
directly from Latin moralis proper behavior of a person in society, literally pertaining to manners,
coined by Cicero (De Fato, II.i) to translate Greek ethikos (see ethics) from Latin mos (genitive
moris) one's disposition, in plural, mores, customs, manners, morals, of uncertain origin. Perhaps
sharing a PIE root with English mood (n.1).    Meaning morally good, conforming to moral rules, is
first recorded late 14c. of stories, 1630s of persons. Original value-neutral sense preserved in
moral support, moral victory (with sense of pertaining to character as opposed to physical action).
Related: Morally.


