tempo (n.)

relative speed of a piece of music, 1724, from Italian tempo, literally time (plural tempi), from
Latin tempus time, season, portion of time (see temporal). Extended (non-musical) senses by 1898.


up (adj.)

c.1300, dwelling inland or upland, from up (adv.). Meaning going up is from 1784. From 1815 as
excited, exhilarated, happy, hence enthusiastic, optimistic. Up-and-coming promising is from 1848.
Musical up-tempo (adj.) is recorded from 1948.


rubato

musical instruction, 1883, Italian, short for tempo rubato, literally robbed time, from past
participle of rubare to steal, rob (see rob (v.)).


half-time (n.)

also halftime, half time, indicating half of the time, 1640s, from half + time. Tempo sense is by
1880. In football, from 1867.


tense (n.)

form of a verb showing time of an action or state, early 14c., tens time, also tense of a verb (late
14c.), from Old French tens time, period of time, era; occasion, opportunity; weather (11c., Modern
French temps), from Latin tempus a portion of time (also source of Spanish tiempo, Italian tempo;
see temporal).


stride (n.)

a step in walking, especially a long one, from Old English stride a stride, a step, from the root of
stride (v.). Compare Dutch strijd, Old High German strit, German Streit fight, contention, combat,
Swedish and Danish strid combat, contention. From c.1300 as a measure of distance roughly the length
of a stride. Figurative meaning advance rapidly, make progress is from c.1600. Of animals
(especially horses) from early 17c. To take (something) in stride (1832), i.e. without change of
gait, originally is of horses leaping hedges in the hunting-field; figurative sense attested from
1902. To hit (one's) stride is from horse-racing. Jazz music stride tempo is attested from 1938.
Meaning a standing with the legs apart, a straddle is from 1590s.


ragtime (n.)

also rag-time, syncopated, jazzy piano music, 1897, perhaps from rag dance ball (1895, American
English dialect), or a shortening of ragged, in reference to the syncopated melody. Rag (n.) ragtime
dance tune is from 1899.    If rag-time was called tempo di raga or rague-temps it might win honor
more speedily. ... What the derivation of the word is[,] I have not the faintest idea. The negroes
call their clog-dancing ragging and the dance a rag. [Rupert Hughes, Boston Musical Record, April
1900]   <hr />   Conceive the futility of trying to reduce the intangible ragness to a strict system
of misbegotten grace notes and untimely rests! In attempting to perfect, and simplify, art is
destroying the unhampered spirit in which consists the whole beauty of rag-time music. The very
essence of rag-time is that it shall lack all art, depending for the spirit to be infused more upon
the performer than upon the composer himself. [Yale Literary Magazine, June, 1899]   <hr />   Her
first rag-time was The Bully, in which she made great sport by bringing a little coloured boy on the
stage with her. Miss [May] Irwin says the way to learn to sing rag-time is to catch a negro and
study him. [Lewis C. Strang, Famous Actresses of the Day in America, Boston, 1899]


