temperate (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, modest, forbearing, self-restrained, not swayed by passion; of climates or
seasons, not liable to excessive heat or cold, from Latin temperatus restrained, regulated, limited,
moderate, sober, calm, steady, from past participle of temperare to moderate, regulate (see temper
(v.)). Related: Temperately; temperateness. Temperate zone is attested from 1550s.


sober (adj.)

mid-14c., moderate in desires or actions, temperate, restrained, especially abstaining from strong
drink, also calm, quiet, not overcome by emotion, from Old French sobre decent; sober (12c.), from
Latin sobrius not drunk, temperate, moderate, sensible, from a variant of se- without (see se-) +
ebrius drunk, of unknown origin. Meaning not drunk at the moment is from late 14c.; also
appropriately solemn, serious, not giddy. Related: Soberly; soberness. Sobersides sedate, serious-
minded person is recorded from 1705.


sophrosyne (n.)

the quality of wise moderation; Greek, prudence, moderation in desires, discretion, temperance, from
sophron of sound mind, prudent, temperate (see Sophronia).


abstinent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French abstinent (earlier astenant) moderate, abstemious, modest, from Latin
abstinentem (nominative abstinens) temperate, moderate, present participle of abstinere to refrain
from (see abstain).


abstemious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin abstemius sober, temperate, from ab(s)- from (see ab-) + stem of temetum strong
drink, related to temulentus drunken. Technically, of liquor, but extended in Latin to temperance in
living generally. Related: Abstemiously; abstemiousness.


self-interest (n.)

also self interest, 1640s, from self- + interest (n.). Related: Self-interested.    [Self-interest]
is a doctrine not very lofty, but clear and sure. It does not seek to attain great objects; but it
attains those it aims for without too much effort. ... [It] does not produce great devotion; but it
suggests little sacrifices each day; by itself it cannot make a man virtuous; but it forms a
multitude of citizens who are regulated, temperate, moderate, farsighted, masters of themselves; and
if it does not lead directly to virtue through the will, it brings them near to it insensibly
through habits. [Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America]


frugal (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French frugal, from Latin frugalis, from undeclined adj. frugi useful, proper,
worthy, honest; temperate, economical, originally dative of frux (plural fruges) fruit, produce,
figuratively value, result, success, related to fructus (see fruit). Sense evolved in Latin from
useful to profitable to economical. Related: Frugally.


modesty (n.)

1530s, freedom from exaggeration, self-control, from Middle French modestie or directly from Latin
modestia moderation, sense of honor, correctness of conduct, from modestus moderate, keeping
measure, sober, gentle, temperate, from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning quality of
having a moderate opinion of oneself is from 1550s; that of womanly propriety is from 1560s.   La
pudeur donne des plaisirs bien flatteurs &#224; l'amant: elle lui fait sentir quelles lois l'on
transgresse pour lui;  (Modesty both pleases and flatters a lover, for it lays stress on the laws
which are being transgressed for his sake.) [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]


yew (n.)

evergreen tree of temperate Europe and Asia, Old English iw, eow yew, from Proto-Germanic *iwo-
(cognates: Middle Dutch iwe, Dutch ijf, Old High German iwa, German Eibe, Old Norse yr), from PIE
*ei-wo- (cognates: Old Irish eo, Welsh ywen yew), perhaps a suffixed form of root *ei- (2) reddish,
motley, yellow.    OED says French if, Spanish iva, Medieval Latin ivus are from Germanic (and says
Dutch ijf is from French); others posit a Gaulish ivos as the source of these. Lithuanian jeva
likewise is said to be from Germanic. The tree symbolizes both death and immortality, being
poisonous as well as long-lived. Reference to its wood as well-suited to making bows dates from
c.1400.


zone (n.)

late 14c., from Latin zona geographical belt, celestial zone, from Greek zone a belt, the girdle
worn by women at the hips, related to zonnynai to gird, from PIE root *yos- to gird (cognates:
Avestan yasta- girt, Lithuanian juosiu to gird, Old Church Slavonic po-jasu girdle). The 10c. Anglo-
Saxon treatise on astronomy translates Latin quinque zonas as fyf gyrdlas.    Originally one of the
five great divisions of the earth's surface (torrid, temperate, frigid; separated by tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn and Arctic and Antarctic circles); meaning any discrete region is first
recorded 1822. Zone defense in team sports is recorded from 1927.


