temporality (n.)

late 14c., temporal power, from Late Latin temporalitas, from temporalis of a time, but for a time
(see temporal).


temporal (adj.)

late 14c., worldly, secular; also terrestrial, earthly; temporary, lasting only for a time, from Old
French temporal earthly, and directly from from Latin temporalis of a time, but for a time,
temporary, from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season, proper time or season, of unknown origin.
Related: Temporally.


priestcraft (n.)

late 15c., business of being a priest, from priest + craft (n.). After rise of Protestantism and the
Enlightenment, it acquired a pejorative sense of arts and devices of ambitious priests for attaining
and holding temporal power and social control (1680s).


Mahdi (n.)

1792, from Arabic mahdiy, literally he who is guided aright, past participle of hada to lead in the
right way. Spiritual and temporal leader expected by some Muslims. Applied c.1880 to insurrectionary
leaders in the Sudan who claimed to be him. Related: Mahdism.


atemporal (adj.)

1870, from a- not + temporal. Related: Atemporally.


contretemps (n.)

1680s, a blunder in fencing, from French contre-temps motion out of time, unfortunate accident, bad
times; from Latin contra + tempus (see temporal). As a ballet term, from 1706; as an unfortunate
accident, 1802; as a dispute, from 1961.


terran (adj.)

of or pertaining to the planet Earth, 1881, in science fiction writing, from Latin terra (see
terrain). Also used as a noun meaning inhabitant of the Earth (1953). An earlier form, terrene was
used in Middle English in sense of belonging to this world, earthly, secular, temporal (c.1300),
later, of the Earth as a planet (1630s).


tempo (n.)

relative speed of a piece of music, 1724, from Italian tempo, literally time (plural tempi), from
Latin tempus time, season, portion of time (see temporal). Extended (non-musical) senses by 1898.


spatial (adj.)

1840 (spacial is from 1838), occupying space, from Latin spatium + adjectival suffix -al (1); formed
in English as an adjective to space (n.), to go with temporal. Meaning of or relating to space is
from 1857. Related: Spatially.


contemporary (adj.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin contemporarius, from Latin com- with (see com-) + temporarius of time,
from tempus time (see temporal (v.)). Meaning modern, characteristic of the present is from 1866.


temporary (adj.)

lasting only for a time, 1540s, from Latin temporarius of seasonal character, lasting a short time,
from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season (see temporal, late 14c., which was the earlier word
for lasting but for a time). The noun meaning person employed only for a time is recorded from 1848.
Related: Temporarily; temporariness.


extempore

1550s (adv.), 1630s (n.), from Latin phrase ex tempore offhand, in accordance with (the needs of)
the moment, literally out of time, from ex out of (see ex-) + tempore, ablative of tempus (genitive
temporis) time (see temporal). Of speaking, strictly without preparation, without time to prepare,
but now often with a sense merely of without notes or a teleprompter.


tidy (adj.)

mid-13c., in good condition, healthy, probably originally in season, timely, opportune, excellent
(though this sense is not attested until mid-14c.), from tide (n.) in the sense of season, time + -y
(2). Of persons, of neat and orderly habits, from 1706. Similar formation in Old High German zitig,
German zeitig, Dutch tijdig, Danish tidig timely, Old English tidlic temporal, also timely,
seasonable.


temporize (v.)

to comply with the times; to yield ostensibly to the current of opinion or circumstances, 1550s
(implied in temporizer), from Middle French temporiser to pass one's time, wait one's time (14c.),
from Medieval Latin temporizare pass time, perhaps via Vulgar Latin *temporare to delay, from Latin
tempus (genitive temporis) time (see temporal). Related: Temporized; temporizing.


tense (n.)

form of a verb showing time of an action or state, early 14c., tens time, also tense of a verb (late
14c.), from Old French tens time, period of time, era; occasion, opportunity; weather (11c., Modern
French temps), from Latin tempus a portion of time (also source of Spanish tiempo, Italian tempo;
see temporal).


temper (v.)

late Old English temprian to moderate, bring to a proper or suitable state, to modify some excessive
quality, to restrain within due limits, from Latin temperare observe proper measure, be moderate,
restrain oneself, also transitive, mix correctly, mix in due proportion; regulate, rule, govern,
manage, usually described as from tempus time, season (see temporal), with a sense of proper time or
season. Meaning to make (steel) hard and elastic is from late 14c. Sense of to tune the pitch of a
musical instrument is recorded from c.1300. Related: Tempered; tempering.


theology (n.)

mid-14c., the science of religion, study of God and his relationship to humanity, from Old French
theologie philosophical study of Christian doctrine; Scripture (14c.), from Latin theologia, from
Greek theologia an account of the gods, from theologos one discoursing on the gods, from theos god
(see theo-) + -logos treating of (see -logy). Meaning a particular system of theology is from
1660s.Theology moves back and forth between two poles, the eternal truth of its foundations and the
temporal situation in which the eternal truth must be received. [Paul Tillich, Systematic Theology,
1951]


now (adv.)

Old English nu now, at present, immediately; now that, also used as an interjection and as an
introductory word; common Germanic (Old Norse nu, Dutch nu, Old Frisian nu, German nun, Gothic nu
now), from PIE *nu now (cognates: Sanskrit and Avestan nu, Old Persian nuram, Hittite nuwa, Greek
nu, nun, Latin nunc, Old Church Slavonic nyne, Lithuanian nu, Old Irish nu-). Perhaps originally
newly, recently, and related to the root of new.    Often merely emphatic; non-temporal usage (as in
Now, then) was in Old English. The adjective meaning up to date first recorded 1967, but the word
was used also as an adjective in Middle English with the sense current from late 14c. Now and then
occasionally is from 1530s; now or never attested from 1550s.


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


tempest (n.)

violent storm, late 13c., from Old French tempeste storm; commotion, battle; epidemic, plague
(11c.), from Vulgar Latin *tempesta, from Latin tempestas a storm; weather, season, time, point in
time, season, period, also commotion, disturbance, related to tempus time, season (see temporal).
Sense evolution is from period of time to period of weather, to bad weather to storm. Words for
weather originally were words for time in languages from Russia to Brittany. Figurative sense of
violent commotion in English is recorded from early 14c. Tempest in a teapot attested from 1818; the
image in other forms is older, such as storm in a creambowl (1670s).


estate (n.)

early 13c., rank, standing, condition, from Anglo-French astat, Old French estat state, position,
condition, health, status, legal estate (Modern French &eacute;tat), from Latin status state or
condition, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    For the excrescent e-, see e-. Sense of
property is late 14c., from that of worldly prosperity; specific application to landed property
(usually of large extent) is first recorded in American English 1620s. A native word for this was
Middle English ethel (Old English &aelig;&eth;el) ancestral land or estate, patrimony. Meaning
collective assets of a dead person or debtor is from 1830.    The three estates (in Sweden and
Aragon, four) conceived as orders in the body politic date from late 14c. In France, they are the
clergy, nobles, and townsmen; in England, originally the clergy, barons, and commons, later Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and commons. For Fourth Estate see four.


