tenant (n.)

early 14c., person who holds lands by title or by lease, from Anglo-French tenaunt (late 13c.), Old
French tenant possessor; feudal tenant (12c.), noun use of present participle of tenir to hold, from
Latin tenere hold, keep, grasp (see tenet). Related: Tenancy. Tenant-farmer attested from 1748.


lieutenant (n.)

late 14c., one who takes the place of another, from Old French lieu tenant substitute, deputy,
literally placeholder, from lieu place (see lieu) + tenant, present participle of tenir to hold (see
tenant). The notion is of a substitute for higher authority. Specific military sense of officer next
in rank to a captain is from 1570s. Pronunciation with lef- is common in Britain, and spellings to
reflect it date back to 14c., but the origin of this is a mystery (OED rejects suggestion that it
comes from old confusion of -u- and -v-).


thegn (n.)

military tenant of an Anglo-Saxon king, 1848, a modern revival of an Old English form; see thane.


holder (n.)

c.1400, tenant, occupier, agent noun from hold (v.). Meaning device for holding something is
attested from 1833.


renter (n.)

late 14c., one who lets or rents to others, proprietor, agent noun from rent (v.). Meaning lessee,
tenant, holder of property by payment of rent is from 1650s.


coterie (n.)

1738, from French coterie circle of acquaintances, originally in Middle French an organization of
peasants holding land from a feudal lord (14c.), from cotier tenant of a cote (see cottage).


quit-rent (n.)

early 15c., rent paid by a tenant in exchange for being discharged from required service; also,
nominal rent as acknowledgment of tenure, from quit (adj.) + rent (n.).


boycott

1880, noun and verb, from Irish Land League ostracism of Capt. Charles C. Boycott (1832-1897), land
agent of Lough-Mask in County Mayo, who refused to lower rents for his tenant farmers. Quickly
adopted by newspapers in languages as far afield as Japanese (boikotto). The family name is from a
place in England.


untenanted (adj.)

1670s, from un- (1) not + tenanted (see tenant (n.)).


heriot (n.)

Old English here-geatwe (plural) military equipment, army-gear, from here army (see harry). An
Anglo-Saxon service of weapons, loaned by the lord to his retainer and repayable to him upon the
retainer's death; transferred by 13c. to a feudal due upon the death of a tenant, payable to his
lord in beasts.


vassal (n.)

early 14c. (c.1200 as a surname) tenant who pledges fealty to a lord, from Old French vassal
subject, subordinate, servant (12c.), from Medieval Latin vassallus manservant, domestic, retainer,
extended from vassus servant, from Old Celtic *wasso- young man, squire (cognates: Welsh gwas youth,
servant, Breton goaz servant, vassal, man, Irish foss servant). The adjective is recorded from
1580s.


colony (n.)

late 14c., ancient Roman settlement outside Italy, from Latin colonia settled land, farm, landed
estate, from colonus husbandman, tenant farmer, settler in new land, from colere to inhabit,
cultivate, frequent, practice, tend, guard, respect, from PIE root *kwel- (1) move around (source of
Latin -cola inhabitant; see cycle (n.)). Also used by the Romans to translate Greek apoikia people
from home. Modern application dates from 1540s.


locum tenens (n.)

Medieval Latin, one who holds the place (of another); from locum (nominative locus; see locus) +
tenens, present participle of tenere (see tenant).


bondage (n.)

c.1300, condition of a serf or slave, from Anglo-Latin bondagium, from Middle English bond a serf,
tenant farmer, from Old English bonda householder, from Old Norse boandi free-born farmer, noun use
of present participle of boa dwell, prepare, inhabit, from PIE *bhow-, from root *bheue- to be,
exist, dwell (see be). Meaning in English changed by influence of bond. The sexual sado-masochism
sense is recorded by 1966.


apron (n.)

mid-15c., faulty separation (as also in adder, umpire) of a napron (c.1300), from Old French naperon
small table-cloth, diminutive of nappe cloth, from Latin mappa napkin. Napron was still in use as
recently as late 16c. The shift of Latin -m- to -n- was a tendency in Old French (conter from
computare, printemps from primum, natte mat, matting, from matta). Symbolic of wife's business from
1610s. Apron-string tenure was in reference to property held in virtue of one's wife, or during her
lifetime only.Even at his age, he ought not to be always tied to his mother's apron string. [Anne
Bront&#235;, The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, 1848]


cycle (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin cyclus, from Greek kyklos circle, wheel, any circular body, circular
motion, cycle of events, from PIE kw(e)-kwl-o-, suffixed, reduplicated form of root *kwel- (1), also
*kwele-, to roll, to move around, wheel (cognates: Sanskrit cakram circle, wheel, carati he moves,
wanders; Avestan caraiti applies himself, c'axra chariot, wagon; Greek polos a round axis (PIE *kw-
becomes Greek p- before some vowels), polein move around; Latin colere to frequent, dwell in, to
cultivate, move around, cultus tended, cultivated, hence also polished, colonus husbandman, tenant
farmer, settler, colonist; Lithuanian kelias a road, a way; Old Norse hvel, Old English hweol wheel;
Old Church Slavonic kolo, Old Russian kolo, Polish ko&#322;o, Russian koleso a wheel).


suit (n.)

c.1300, sute, also suete, suite, seute, a band of followers; a retinue, company; also set of
matching garments worn by such persons, matching livery or uniform; hence  kind, sort; the same
kind, a match; also pursuit, chase, and in law, obligation (of a tenant) to attend court; attendance
at court, from Anglo-French suit, siwete, from Old French suite, sieute pursuit, act of following,
hunt; retinue; assembly (12c., Modern French suite), from Vulgar Latin *sequita, fem. of *sequitus,
from Latin secutus, past participle of sequi to attend, follow (see sequel).    Legal sense of
lawsuit; legal action is from mid-14c. Meaning the wooing of a woman is from late 15c. Meaning set
of clothes to be worn together is attested from late 14c., also matching material or fabric, from
notion of the livery or uniform of court attendants. As a derisive term for businessman, it dates
from 1979. Meaning matched set of objects, number of objects of the same kind or pattern used
together is from late 14c., as is that of row, series, sequence. Meaning set of playing cards
bearing the same symbol is first attested 1520s, also ultimately from the notion of livery. To
follow suit (1670s) is from card-playing.


