tender (adj.)

soft, easily injured, early 13c., from Old French tendre soft, delicate; young (11c.), from Latin
tenerem (nominative tener) soft, delicate; of tender age, youthful, from a derivative of PIE root
*ten- stretch (see tenet), on the notion of stretched, hence thin, hence weak or young. Compare
Sanskrit tarunah young, tender, Greek teren tender, delicate, Armenian t'arm young, fresh, green.
Meaning kind, affectionate, loving first recorded early 14c. Meaning having the delicacy of youth,
immature is attested in English from early 14c. Related: Tenderly; tenderness. Tender-hearted first
recorded 1530s.


tenderloin (n.)

1828, tender part of a loin of pork or beef, from tender (adj.) + loin. The slang meaning police
district noted for vice appeared first 1887 in New York, on the notion of the neighborhood of the
chief theaters, restaurants, etc., being the juciest cut for graft and blackmail.


tenderfoot (n.)

1866, American English, originally of newcomers to ranching or mining districts, from tender (adj.)
+ foot (n.). The U.S. equivalent of what in Great Britain was generally called a greenhand. As a
level in Boy Scouting, it is recorded from 1908.    Among the Indians, more than half of every
sentence is expressed by signs. And miners illustrate their conversation by the various terms used
in mining. I have always noticed how clearly these terms conveyed the idea sought. Awkwardness in
comprehending this dialect easily reveals that the hearer bears the disgrace of being a pilgrim, or
a tender-foot, as they style the new emigrant. [A Year in Montana, Atlantic Monthly, August 1866]
Tender-footed (adj.) cautious, originally of horses, is recorded from 1680s; of persons from 1854.


tender (v.)

to offer formally, 1540s, from Middle French tendre to offer, hold forth (11c.), from Latin tendere
to stretch, extend (see tenet). The retention of the ending of the French infinitive is unusual (see
render (v.) for another example). The noun meaning formal offer for acceptance is from 1540s;
specific sense of money that may be legally offered as payment is from 1740; hence legal tender
currency.


tender (n.)

person who tends another, late 15c., probably an agent noun formed from Middle English tenden attend
to (see tend (v.2)); later extended to locomotive engineers (1825) and barmen (1883). The meaning
small boat used to attend larger ones first recorded 1670s.


tenderize (v.)

1733, from tender + -ize. Specifically of food, recorded by 1935, originally American English.
Related: Tenderized; tenderizing.


tendril (n.)

leafless plant-organ attaching to another for support, 1530s, from Middle French tendrillon bud,
shoot, cartilage, perhaps a diminutive of tendron cartilage, from Old French tendre soft (see tender
(adj.)), or else from Latin tendere to stretch, extend (see tender (v.)).


TLC (n.)

by 1953 as an abbreviation of tender loving care.


feelings (n.)

tender or sensitive side of one's nature, 1771, from plural of feeling.


surculation (n.)

act of pruning, 1660s, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin surculare chear of shoots
or twigs, from surculus tender young shoot, twig, sprout, sucker.


fireman (n.)

late 14c., tender of a fire, from fire (n.) + man (n.). As person hired to put out (rather than
tend) fires it is attested from 1714.


delicacy (n.)

late 14c., delightfulness; fastidiousness; quality of being addicted to sensuous pleasure, from
delicate + -cy. Meaning fineness, softness, tender loveliness is from 1580s; that of weakness of
constitution is from 1630s. Meaning fine food, a dainty viand is from early 15c.


tidbit (n.)

1630s, probably from dialectal tid fond, solicitous, tender (perhaps by influence of tit (n.2)) +
bit (n.1) morsel.


bartender (n.)

also bar-tender; 1836, American English, from bar (n.2) + agent noun of tend (v.2).


nesh (adj.)

tender, delicate, weak, now a Northern England dialect word, from Old English hnesce soft in texture
(cognate with early modern Dutch nesch, Gothic hnasqus), of unknown origin.


zoophilia (n.)

attraction to animals involving release of sexual energy, 1899, in a translation of Krafft-Ebing,
from zoo- animal + -philia. [F]ormerly not implying sexual intercourse or bestiality [OED]. The
meaning sympathy or tender care for living creatures is in the nativized formation zoophily (1886).


zucchini (n.)

1915 in English cookery books, 1910 in travel books about Italy as an Italian word (defined as an
odd kind of little squash, very tender and palatable), from Italian, plural of zucchino, diminutive
of zucca gourd, squash, perhaps from Late Latin cucutia, which is of unknown origin.


quick (n.)

living persons, Old English cwic, from quick (adj.); frequently paired with the dead, as in Old
English cwicum &amp; deadum. The quick tender part of the flesh (under a nail, etc.) is from 1520s,
as is the figurative use of it.


goalie (n.)

1921, from goal + -ie. Probably a shortening of goal-tender (1909), which tends to be the term used
in ice hockey, as opposed to goal-keeper (1650s).


muffin (n.)

light, small cake made with eggs, 1703, moofin, possibly from Low German muffen, plural of muffe
small cake; or somehow connected with Old French moflet soft, tender (said of bread). Muffin top in
reference to waistline bulge over tight, low jeans is attested by 2005, from resemblance to baked
muffins from a tin.


lush (adj.)

mid-15c., lax, flaccid, soft, tender, from Old French lasche soft, succulent, from laschier loosen,
from Late Latin laxicare become shaky, related to Latin laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax).
Sense of luxuriant in growth is first attested c.1600, in Shakespeare. Applied to colors since 1744.
Related: Lushly; lushness.


minion (n.)

c.1500, a favorite; a darling; a low dependant; one who pleases rather than benefits [Johnson], from
Middle French mignon a favorite, darling (n.), also a term of (probably homosexual) abuse; as an
adjective, dainty, pleasing, favorite, from Old French mignot pretty, attractive, dainty, gracious,
affectionate, perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Old Irish min tender, soft), or from Old High German
minnja, minna love, memory (see mind (n.)). Used  16c.-17c. without disparaging overtones.


mellow (adj.)

mid-15c., melwe soft, sweet, juicy (of ripe fruit), perhaps related to melowe, variant of mele
ground grain (see meal (2)), influenced by Middle English merow soft, tender, from Old English
mearu. Meaning slightly drunk is from 1680s. Mellow yellow banana peel smoked in an effort to get
high is from 1967. Related: Mellowly; mellowness.


fond (adj.)

mid-14c., originally foolish, silly, from past tense of fonnen to fool, be foolish, perhaps from
Middle English fonne fool (early 14c.), of uncertain origin; or possibly related to fun.    Meaning
evolved by 1590 via foolishly tender to having strong affections for. Another sense of fonne was to
lose savor, which may be the original meaning of the word (as in Wyclif: Gif &thorn;e salt be fonnyd
it is not wor&thorn;i, c.1380). Related: Fonder; fondest.


legal (adj.)

mid-15c. of or pertaining to the law, from Middle French l&#233;gal or directly from Latin legalis
legal, pertaining to the law, from lex (genitive legis) law, possibly related to legere to gather,
on notion of a collection of rules (see lecture (n.)).    Sense of permitted by law is from 1640s.
Related: Legally. The Old French form was leial, loial (see leal, loyal). Legal tender is from 1740.


soft-hearted (adj.)

also softhearted, 1590s, from soft (adj.) tender + hearted. Related: Soft-heartedly; soft-
heartedness.


gentle (adj.)

early 13c., well-born, from Old French gentil high-born, noble, of good family (11c., in Modern
French nice, graceful, pleasing; fine pretty), from Latin gentilis of the same family or clan, from
gens (genitive gentis) race, clan, from root of gignere beget, from PIE root *gen- produce (see
genus). Sense of gracious, kind (now obsolete) first recorded late 13c.; that of mild, tender is
1550s. Older sense remains in gentleman.


mitigate (v.)

early 15c., relieve (pain), from Latin mitigatus, past participle of mitigare soften, make tender,
ripen, mellow, tame, figuratively, make mild or gentle, pacify, soothe, ultimately from mitis
gentle, soft (from PIE *mei- mild) + root of agere do, make, act (see act). First element is from
PIE root *mei- soft, mild. Related: Mitigated; mitigating; mitigates.


unfeeling (adj.)

late Old English had unfelende, having no sensation. Middle English had a verb unfeel be insensible,
fail to feel (early 14c.) as well as unfeelingness insensibility, loss of sensation, and unfeelingly
without understanding or direct knowledge (late 14c.), and a verbal noun unfeeling loss of
sensation, lack of feeling. However the word in its main modern meaning devoid of kindly or tender
feelings is from 1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of feel (v.). Related: Unfeelingly.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


brawn (n.)

late 13c., from Old French braon fleshy or muscular part, buttock, from Frankish *brado ham, roast
or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- (cognates: Old High German brato tender
meat, German Braten roast, Old Norse bra&eth; raw meat, Old English br&aelig;d flesh), from PIE
*bhre- burn, heat, from root *bhreue- to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn (see brew (v.)). The
original sense is piece of meat suitable for roasting. The specific sense 'boar's flesh' is
exclusively of English development, and characteristic of English habits [OED].


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


weak (adj.)

c.1300, from Old Norse veikr weak, cognate with Old English wac weak, pliant, soft, from Proto-
Germanic *waikwa- yield (cognates: Old Saxon wek, Swedish vek, Middle Dutch weec, Dutch week weak,
soft, tender, Old High German weih yielding, soft, German weich soft), from PIE root *weik- (4) to
bend, wind (see vicarious).    Sense of lacking authority is first recorded early 15c.; that of
lacking moral strength late 14c. In grammar, denoting a verb inflected by regular syllabic addition
rather than by change of the radical vowel, from 1833. Related: Weakly. Weak-kneed wanting in
resolve is from 1870.


mild (adj.)

Old English milde gentle, merciful, from Proto-Germanic *milthjaz- (cognates: Old Norse mildr, Old
Saxon mildi, Old Frisian milde, Middle Dutch milde, Dutch mild, Old High German milti, German milde
mild, Gothic mildi&thorn;a kindness), from PIE *meldh-, from root *mel- soft, with derivatives
referring to soft or softened materials (cognates: Greek malthon weakling, myle mill; Latin molere
to grind; Old Irish meldach tender; Sanskrit mrdh to neglect, also to be moist). Originally of
persons and powers; of the weather from c.1400, of disease from 1744. Also in Old English as an
adverb, mercifully, graciously.


tough (adj.)

Old English toh strong and firm in texture, tenacious, sticky, from Proto-Germanic *tanhu-
(cognates: Middle Low German tege, Middle Dutch taey, Dutch taai, Old High German zach, German
z&auml;h), which Watkins suggests is from PIE *denk- to bite, from the notion of holding fast. See
rough for spelling change.    From c.1200 as strong, powerful; c.1300 as not tender or fragile;
early 14c. as difficult to chew, also hard to endure. Figurative sense of steadfast is mid-14c.;
that of hard to do, trying, laborious is from 1610s. Verb tough it endure the experience is first
recorded 1830, American English. Tough guy attested from 1901. Tough-minded first recorded 1907 in
William James. Tough luck first recorded 1912; tough shit, dismissive retort to a complaint, is from
1946.


doughnut (n.)

1809, American English, from dough + nut (n.), probably on the notion of being a small round lump
(the holes came later, first mentioned c.1861). First recorded by Washington Irving, who described
them as balls of sweetened dough, fried in hog's fat, and called doughnuts, or olykoeks. Earlier
name for it was dough-boy (1680s). Bartlett (1848) meanwhile lists doughnuts and crullers among the
types of olycokes, a word he derives from Dutch olikoek, literally oil-cake, to indicate a cake
fried in lard.    The ladies of Augusta, Maine, set in operation and carried out a novel idea,
namely, the distribution of over fifty bushels of doughnuts to the Third volunteer regiment of that
State. A procession of ladies, headed by music, passed between double lines of troops, who presented
arms, and were afterwards drawn up in hollow square to receive from tender and gracious hands the
welcome doughnation. [Frazar Kirkland, Anecdotes of the Rebellion, 1866]     Meaning a driving in
tight circles is U.S. slang, 1981. Compare also donut.


green (n., adj.)

Old English grene green, young, immature, raw, earlier groeni, from Proto-Germanic *gronja-
(cognates: Old Saxon grani, Old Frisian grene, Old Norse gr&aelig;nn, Danish gr&oslash;n, Dutch
groen, Old High German gruoni, German gr&uuml;n), from PIE root *ghre- grow (see grass), through
sense of color of living plants.    Meaning a field, grassy place was in Old English. Sense of of
tender age, youthful is from early 15c.; hence gullible (c.1600). The color of jealousy at least
since Shakespeare (1596); Greensleeves, ballad of an inconstant lady-love, is from 1570s. Green
light in figurative sense of permission is from 1937. Green and red as signals on railways first
attested 1883, as nighttime substitutes for semaphore flags. Green beret originally British commando
is from 1949. Green room room for actors when not on stage is from 1701; presumably a well-known one
was painted green.


feisty (adj.)

1896, aggressive, exuberant, touchy, American English, with -y (2) + feist small dog, earlier fice,
fist (American English, 1805); short for fysting curre stinking cur, attested from 1520s, from
Middle English fysten, fisten break wind (mid-15c.); related to Old English fisting stink, from
Proto-Germanic *fistiz- a fart, said to be from PIE *pezd- (see fart), but there are difficulties.
The 1811 slang dictionary defines fice as a small windy escape backwards, more obvious to the nose
than ears; frequently by old ladies charged on their lap-dogs. Compare also Danish fise to blow, to
fart, and obsolete English aske-fise, fire-tender, literally ash-blower (early 15c.), from an
unrecorded Norse source, used in Middle English for a kind of bellows, but originally a term of
reproach among northern nations for an unwarlike fellow who stayed at home in the chimney corner
[OED].


raw (adj.)

Old English hreaw uncooked, raw, from Proto-Germanic *khrawaz (cognates: Old Norse hrar, Danish raa,
Old Saxon hra, Middle Dutch rau, Dutch rauw, Old High German hrawer, German roh), from PIE root
*kreue- (1) raw flesh (cognates: Sanskrit kravih raw flesh, krura- bloody, raw, hard; Greek kreas
flesh; Latin crudus not cooked, cruor thick blood; Old Irish cru, Lithuanian kraujas, Old Church
Slavonic kruvi blood; Old English hrot thick fluid, serum).    Meaning tender, sore is from late
14c.; of persons, inexperienced from 1560s; of weather, damp and chilly first recorded 1540s.
Related: Rawly; rawness. Raw material is from 1796, with sense of in a rudimental condition,
unfinished. Phrase in the raw naked (1921) is from the raw exposed flesh, attested from 1823. Raw
deal harsh treatment attested by 1893.


marshal (n.)

early 13c. as a surname; mid-13c. as high officer of the royal court; from Old French mareschal
commanding officer of an army; officer in charge of a household (Modern French mar&#233;chal),
originally stable officer, horse tender, groom (Frankish Latin mariscaluis) from Frankish *marhskalk
or a similar Germanic word, literally horse-servant (compare Old High German marahscalc groom,
Middle Dutch maerschalc), from Proto-Germanic *markhaz horse (see mare (n.1)) + *skalkaz servant
(source of Old English scealc servant, retainer, member of a crew, Dutch schalk rogue, wag, Gothic
skalks servant).    Cognate with Old English hors&thorn;egn. From c.1300 as stable officer; early
14c. as military commander, general in the army. For development history, compare constable. Also
from Germanic are Italian scalco steward, Spanish mariscal marshal.


bowel (n.)

c.1300, from Old French boele intestines, bowels, innards (12c., Modern French boyau), from Medieval
Latin botellus small intestine, originally sausage, diminutive of botulus sausage, a word borrowed
from Oscan-Umbrian, from PIE *gwet-/*geut- intestine (cognates: Latin guttur throat, Old English
cwi&eth;, Gothic qi&thorn;us belly, womb, German kutteln guts, chitterlings).    Greek splankhnon
(from the same PIE root as spleen) was a word for the principal internal organs, which also were
felt in ancient times to be the seat of various emotions. Greek poets, from Aeschylus down, regarded
the bowels as the seat of the more violent passions such as anger and love, but by the Hebrews they
were seen as the seat of tender affections, especially kindness, benevolence, and compassion.
Splankhnon was used in Septuagint to translate a Hebrew word, and from thence early Bibles in
English rendered it in its literal sense as bowels, which thus acquired in English a secondary
meaning of pity, compassion (late 14c.). But in later editions the word often was translated as
heart. Bowel movement is attested by 1874.


