tend (v.2)

attend to, c.1200, a shortening of Middle English atenden (see attend).


tender (n.)

person who tends another, late 15c., probably an agent noun formed from Middle English tenden attend
to (see tend (v.2)); later extended to locomotive engineers (1825) and barmen (1883). The meaning
small boat used to attend larger ones first recorded 1670s.


tend (v.1)

to incline, to move in a certain direction, early 14c., from Old French tendre stretch out, hold
forth, hand over, offer (11c.), from Latin tendere to stretch, extend, make tense; aim, direct;
direct oneself, hold a course (see tenet).


verge (v.1)

tend, incline, c.1600, from Latin vergere to bend, turn, tend toward, incline, from PIE *werg- to
turn, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). Influenced by verge (v.2) provide with a
border (c.1600); be adjacent to (1787), from verge (n.). Related: Verged; verging.


down (n.2)

Old English dun down, moor; height, hill, mountain, from Proto-Germanic *dunaz- (cognates: Middle
Dutch dunen sandy hill, Dutch duin), probably a pre-insular loan-word from Celtic [Cambridge
Dictionary of English Place-Names], in other words, borrowed at a very early period, before the
Anglo-Saxon migration, from PIE root *dheue- to close, finish, come full circle. Meaning elevated
rolling grassland is from c.1300.    The non-English Germanic words tend to mean dune, sand bank
(see dune), while the Celtic cognates tend to mean hill, citadel (compare Old Irish dun hill, hill
fort; Welsh din fortress, hill fort; and second element in place names London, Verdun, etc.). German
D&uuml;ne, French dune, Italian, Spanish duna are said to be loan-words from Dutch.


agathism (n.)

the doctrine that all things tend toward the good, 1830, from agathist + -ism.


canoodle (v.)

to indulge in caresses and fondling endearments [OED], by 1850s, said to be U.S. slang, of uncertain
origin. The earliest known sources are British, but they tend to identify the word as American. In
the 1830s it seems to have been in use in Britain in a sense of cheat or overpower. Related:
Canoodled; canoodling.


fireman (n.)

late 14c., tender of a fire, from fire (n.) + man (n.). As person hired to put out (rather than
tend) fires it is attested from 1714.


hold (v.)

Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), to contain, grasp; retain; foster, cherish,
class VII strong verb (past tense heold, past participle healden), from Proto-Germanic *haldan
(cognates: Old Saxon haldan, Old Frisian halda, Old Norse halda, Dutch houden, German halten to
hold, Gothic haldan to tend), originally to keep, tend, watch over (as cattle), later to have.
Ancestral sense is preserved in behold. The original past participle holden was replaced by held
beginning 16c., but survives in some legal jargon and in beholden.   Hold back is 1530s, transitive;
1570s, intransitive; hold off is early 15c., transitive; c.1600, intransitive; hold out is 1520s as
to stretch forth, 1580s as to resist pressure. Hold on is early 13c. as to maintain one's course,
1830 as to keep one's grip on something, 1846 as an order to wait or stop. To hold (one's) tongue be
silent is from c.1300. To hold (one's) own is from early 14c. To hold (someone's) hand give moral
support is from 1935. Phrase hold your horses be patient is from 1844. To have and to hold have been
paired alliteratively since at least c.1200, originally of marriage but also of real estate.


bartender (n.)

also bar-tender; 1836, American English, from bar (n.2) + agent noun of tend (v.2).


Dalmatian

1810, spotted dog, presumably named for Dalmatia, but dog breeders argue over whether there is a
Croatian ancestry for the breed, which seems to be represented in Egyptian bas-reliefs and Hellenic
friezes. Popular in early 1800s as a carriage dog, to trot alongside carriages and guard them in
owner's absence. Even fire departments nowadays tend to spell it *Dalmation.


jejunum (n.)

late 14c., from Latin ieiunum, neuter of ieiunus (see jejune). Translating Greek nestis (Galen). So
called because it typically is found empty during dissections, perhaps because it would tend to
drain in a body laid on its back.


marshal (v.)

early 15c., to tend (horses), from marshal (n.). Meaning to arrange, place in order is from mid-
15c.; that of to arrange for fighting is from mid-15c. Figurative use by 1690s. Related: Marshaled;
marshaling.


men (n.)

plural of man (n.). To separate the men from the boys in a figurative sense is from 1943; earliest
uses tend to credit it to U.S. aviators in World War II.    One of the most expressive G.I. terms to
come out of the late strife was that's where they separate the men from the boys -- so stated by
American aviators leaning from their cockpits to observe a beach-landing under fire on some Pacific
island far below. [Arts Magazine, 1947]


bettor (n.)

also better (OED notes that English agent nouns in -er tend to shift toward -or as their senses
become more specific), agent noun from bet (v.).


violon d&#039;Ingres (n.)

an occasional pastime, an activity other than that for which one is well-known, or at which one
excells, 1963, from French, literally Ingres' violin, from the story that the great painter prefered
to play his violin (badly) for visitors instead of showing them his pictures.   Une l&eacute;gende,
assez suspecte, pr&eacute;tend que le peintre Ingres &eacute;tat plus fier de son jeu sur le violon,
jeu qui &eacute;tait fort ordinaire, que de sa peinture, qui l'avait rendu illustre. [Larousse du
XXe Siecle, 1931]


neocon (n.)

by 1987, abbreviation for neo-conservative in the U.S. political sense.  Neoconservatism is the
first variant of American conservatism in the past century that is in the 'American grain.' It is
hopeful, not lugubrious; forward-looking, not nostalgic; and its general tone is cheerful, not grim
or dyspeptic. Its 20th-century heroes tend to be TR, FDR, and Ronald Reagan. Such Republican and
conservative worthies as Calvin Coolidge, Herbert Hoover, Dwight Eisenhower, and Barry Goldwater are
politely overlooked. [Irving Kristol, The Neoconservative Persuasion, in The Weekly Standard, Aug.
25, 2003]


-ics

in the names of sciences or disciplines (acoustics, aerobics, economics, etc.) it represents a 16c.
revival of the classical custom of using the neuter plural of adjectives with -ikos (see -ic) to
mean matters relevant to and also as the titles of treatises about them. Subject matters that
acquired their names in English before c.1500, however, tend to remain in singular (such as
arithmetic, logic).


-ette

diminutive formation, from Old French -ette (fem.), used indiscriminately in Old French with
masculine form -et. As a general rule, older words borrowed from French have -et in English, while
ones taken in since 17c. have -ette. In use with native words since 20c., especially among persons
who coin new product names, who tend to give it a sense of imitation, a sort of. Also in words like
sermonette, which, OED remarks, can scarcely be said to be in good use, though often met with in
newspapers.


colony (n.)

late 14c., ancient Roman settlement outside Italy, from Latin colonia settled land, farm, landed
estate, from colonus husbandman, tenant farmer, settler in new land, from colere to inhabit,
cultivate, frequent, practice, tend, guard, respect, from PIE root *kwel- (1) move around (source of
Latin -cola inhabitant; see cycle (n.)). Also used by the Romans to translate Greek apoikia people
from home. Modern application dates from 1540s.


tonsure (n.)

late 14c., shaving of the head or part of it, especially as a religious rite, from Anglo-French
tonsure (mid-14c.), Old French tonsure ecclesiastical tonsure; sheep-shearing (14c.), from Latin
tonsura a shearing, clipping, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear, shave, clip, crop,
from PIE *tend-, from root *tem- to cut (see tome). The verb is attested from 1706 (implied in
tonsured). Related: Tonsuring.


pastor (n.)

late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), shepherd, also spiritual guide, shepherd of souls, from Old
French pastor, pastur herdsman, shepherd (12c.), from Latin pastorem (nominative pastor) shepherd,
from pastus, past participle of pascere to lead to pasture, set to grazing, cause to eat, from PIE
root *pa- to tend, keep, pasture, feed, guard, protect (see food). The spiritual sense was in Church
Latin (e.g. Gregory's Cura Pastoralis). The verb in the Christian sense is from 1872.


culture (n.)

mid-15c., the tilling of land, from Middle French culture and directly from Latin cultura a
cultivating, agriculture, figuratively care, culture, an honoring, from past participle stem of
colere tend, guard, cultivate, till (see colony). The figurative sense of cultivation through
education is first attested c.1500. Meaning the intellectual side of civilization is from 1805; that
of collective customs and achievements of a people is from 1867.    For without culture or holiness,
which are always the gift of a very few, a man may renounce wealth or any other external thing, but
he cannot renounce hatred, envy, jealousy, revenge. Culture is the sanctity of the intellect.
[William Butler Yeats]    Slang culture vulture is from 1947. Culture shock first recorded 1940.


wrench (v.)

Old English wrencan to twist, from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (cognates: Old High German renken,
German renken to twist, wrench, Old English wringan to wring), from PIE *wreng- to turn (cognates:
Sanskrit vrnakti turns, twists, Lithuanian rengtis to grow crooked, to writhe), nasalized variant of
*werg- to turn (cognates: Latin vergere to turn, tend toward), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend
(see versus). Related: Wrenched, wrenching.


ward (v.)

Old English weardian to keep guard, watch, protect, preserve, from Proto-Germanic *wardon to guard
(cognates: Old Saxon wardon, Old Norse var&eth;a to guard, Old Frisian wardia, Middle Dutch waerden
to take care of, Old High German warten to guard, look out for, expect, German warten to wait, wait
on, nurse, tend), from PIE *war-o- (see ward (n.)). French garder, Italian guardare, Spanish guardar
are Germanic loan-words. Meaning to parry, to fend off (now usually with off) is recorded from
1570s. Related: Warded; warding.


cure (v.)

late 14c., from Old French curer, from Latin curare take care of, hence, in medical language, treat
medically, cure (see cure (n.)). In reference to fish, pork, etc., first recorded 1743. Related:
Cured; curing.    Most words for cure, heal in European languages originally applied to the person
being treated but now can be used with reference to the disease, too. Relatively few show an ancient
connection to words for physician; typically they are connected instead to words for make whole or
tend to or even conjurer. French gu&eacute;rir (with Italian guarir, Old Spanish guarir) is from a
Germanic verb stem also found in in Gothic warjan, Old English wearian ward off, prevent, defend
(see warrant (n.)).


meridian (n.)

mid-14c., noon, from Old French meridien of the noon time, midday; the Meridian; southerner (12c.),
and directly from Latin meridianus of midday, of noon, southerly, to the south, from meridies noon,
south, from meridie at noon, altered by dissimilation from pre-Latin *medi die, locative of medius
mid- (see medial (adj.)) + dies day (see diurnal). Cartographic sense first recorded late 14c.
Figurative uses tend to suggest point of highest development or fullest power.    The city in
Mississippi, U.S., was settled 1854 (as Sowashee Station) at a railway junction and given its
current name in 1860, supposedly by people who thought meridian meant junction (they perhaps
confused the word with median).


pretend (v.)

late 14c., to profess, assert, maintain (a claim, etc.), to direct (one's) efforts, from Old French
pretendre to lay claim, from Latin praetendere stretch in front, put forward, allege, from prae
before (see pre-) + tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- to stretch (see tend).    Main modern
sense of feign, put forward a false claim is recorded from c.1400; the older sense of simply to
claim is behind the string of royal pretenders (1690s) in English history. Meaning to play, make
believe is recorded from 1865. In 17c. pretend also could mean make a suit of marriage for, from a
sense in French. Related: Pretended; pretending.


food (n.)

Old English foda food, nourishment; fuel, also figurative, from Proto-Germanic *fodon (cognates:
Gothic fodeins), from Germanic root *fod-, equivalent of PIE *pa- to tend, keep, pasture, to
protect, to guard, to feed (cognates: Greek pateisthai to feed; Latin pabulum food, fodder, panis
bread, pasci to feed, pascare to graze, pasture, feed, pastor shepherd, literally feeder; Avestan
pitu- food; Old Church Slavonic pasti feed cattle, pasture; Russian pishcha food).   Food chain is
from 1917. Food poisoning attested by 1864; food processor in the kitchen appliance sense from 1973.


hurt (v.)

c.1200, to injure, wound (the body, feelings, reputation, etc.), also to stumble (into), bump into;
charge against, rush, crash into; knock (things) together, from Old French hurter to ram, strike,
collide, perhaps from Frankish *hurt ram (cognates: Middle High German hurten run at, collide, Old
Norse hrutr ram). The English usage is as old as the French, and perhaps there was a native Old
English *hyrtan, but it has not been recorded. Meaning to be a source of pain (of a body part) is
from 1850. To hurt (one's) feelings attested by 1779. Sense of knock died out 17c., but compare
hurtle. Other Germanic languages tend to use their form of English scathe in this sense (Danish
skade, Swedish skada, German schaden, Dutch schaden).


lust (n.)

Old English lust desire, appetite, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *lustuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Dutch, German lust, Old Norse lyst, Gothic lustus pleasure, desire, lust), from PIE *las-
to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Latin lascivus wanton, playful, lustful; see lascivious).
In Middle English, any source of pleasure or delight, also an appetite, also a liking for a person,
also fertility (of soil). Sense of sinful sexual desire, degrading animal passion (now the main
meaning) developed in late Old English from the word's use in Bible translations (such as lusts of
the flesh to render Latin concupiscentia carnis [I John ii:16]); the cognate words in other Germanic
languages tend still to mean simply pleasure.


till (v.)

cultivate (land) early 13c.; plow, late 14c., from Old English tilian cultivate, tend, work at, get
by labor, originally strive after, aim at, aspire to, related to till fixed point, goal, and til
good, useful, suitable, from Proto-Germanic *tilojan (cognates: Old Frisian tilia to get, cultivate,
Old Saxon tilian to obtain, Middle Dutch, Dutch telen to breed, raise, cultivate, cause, Old High
German zilon to strive, German zielen to aim, strive), from source of till (prep.).    For sense
development, compare expression work the land, Old Norse yrkja work, but especially cultivate (and
also to make verses); Old Church Slavonic delati work, also cultivate.  Related: Tilled; tilling.


smile (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Low German *smilen or a Scandinavian source (such as Danish smile smile,
Swedish smila smile, smirk, simper, fawn), from Proto-Germanic *smil-, extended form of PIE root
*smei- to laugh, smile (cognates: Old English smerian to laugh at, scorn, Old High German smieron to
smile, Latin mirus wonderful, mirari to wonder). Related: Smiled; smiling.     Gradually pushed the
usual Old English word, smearcian (modern smirk), into a specific, unpleasant sense. Of the eyes,
from 1759. Figuratively, as indicating favor or encouragement, from c.1400. Romance, Celtic, and
Slavic languages tend to use a diminutive of the word for laugh to mean smile (such as Latin ridere
laugh; subridere smile), perhaps literally small laugh or low laugh.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


caveat (n.)

1540s, from Latin, literally let him beware, 3rd person singular present subjunctive of cavere to
beware, take heed, watch, guard against, from PIE root *skeue- to pay attention, perceive (cognates:
Sanskrit kavih wise, sage, seer, poet; Lithuanian kavoti tend, safeguard; Armenian cucanem I show;
Latin cautio wariness; Greek koein to mark, perceive, hear, kydos glory, fame, literally that which
is heard of; Old Church Slavonic chujo to feel, perceive, hear, cudo wonder, literally that which is
heard of; Czech (z)koumati to perceive, be aware of; Serbian chuvati watch, heed; Old English
sceawian to look at (source of show (v.)); Middle Dutch schoon beautiful, bright, properly showy;
Gothic hausjan hear).


breakfast (n.)

mid-15c., from break (v.) + fast (n.). An Old English word for it was undernmete (see undern), also
morgenmete morning meal.. The verb is recorded from 1670s. Related: Breakfasted; breakfasting.
Spanish almuerzo lunch, but formerly and still locally breakfast, is from Latin admorsus, past
participle of admordere to bite into, from ad- to + mordere to bite. In common with almuerzo, words
for breakfast tend over time to shift in meaning toward lunch; compare French d&eacute;jeuner
breakfast, later lunch (equivalent of Spanish desayuno breakfast), both from Vulgar Latin
*disieiunare to breakfast, from Latin dis- apart, in a different direction from + ieiunare, jejunare
fast (see jejune; also compare dine). German Fr&#252;hst&#252;ck is from Middle High German
vruost&#252;cke, literally early bit.


suspicion (n.)

c.1300, act of suspecting; unverified conjecture of wrongdoing; mistrust, distrust, from Anglo-
French suspecioun, corresponding to Old French suspicion, sospe&ccedil;on mistrust, suspicion
(Modern French soup&ccedil;on), from Late Latin suspectionem (nominative suspectio) mistrust,
suspicion, fear, awe, noun of state from past participle stem of Latin suspicere look up at (see
suspect (adj.)). Spelling in English influenced 14c. by learned Old French forms closer to Latin
suspicionem. Used as a verb meaning to suspect, it figures in literary representations of U.S.
Western (Kentucky) slang from 1830s.    Suspicion words in other Indo-European languages also tend
to be words for think or look with prefixes meaning under, behind; such as Greek hypopsia (hypo
under, opsis sight), hyponoia (noein to think); Lettish aizduomas (aiz behind, duomat think);
Russian podozrenie (Slavic podu under, Old Church Slavonic zireti see, look); Dutch achterdocht
(achter behind, denken to think).


cheek (n.)

Old English ceace, cece jaw, jawbone, in late Old English also the fleshy wall of the mouth. Perhaps
from the root of Old English ceowan chew (see chew (v.)), or from Proto-Germanic *kaukon (cognates:
Middle Low German kake jaw, jawbone, Middle Dutch kake jaw, Dutch kaak), not found outside West
Germanic.    Words for cheek, jaw, and chin tend to run together in IE languages (compare PIE
*genw-, source of Greek genus jaw, cheek, geneion chin, and English chin); Aristotle considered the
chin as the front of the jaws and the cheeks as the back of them. The other Old English word for
cheek was ceafl (see jowl).    A thousand men he [Samson] slow eek with his hond,  And had no wepen
but an asses cheek.  [Chaucer, Monk's Tale]    In reference to the buttocks from c.1600. Sense of
insolence is from 1840, perhaps from a notion akin to that which led to jaw insolent speech, mouth
off, etc. To turn the other cheek is an allusion to Matt. v:39 and Luke vi:29.


brass (n.)

Old English br&aelig;s brass, bronze, originally in reference to an alloy of copper and tin (now
bronze), later and in modern use an alloy of two parts copper, one part zinc. A mystery word, with
no known cognates beyond English. Perhaps akin to French brasser to brew, because it is an alloy. It
also has been compared to Old Swedish brasa fire, but no sure connection can be made. Yet another
theory connects it with Latin ferrum iron, itself of obscure origin.    As brass was unknown in
antiquity, use of the word in Bible translations, etc., likely means bronze. The Romans were the
first to deliberately make it. Words for brass in other languages (such as German Messing, Old
English m&aelig;sling, French laiton, Italian ottone) also tend to be difficult to explain.    The
meaning effrontery, impudence is from 1620s. Slang sense of high officials is first recorded 1899.
The brass tacks that you get down to (1897) probably are the ones used to measure cloth on the
counter of a dry goods store, suggesting precision. Slang brass balls toughness, courage
(emphatically combining two metaphors for the same thing) attested by 1960s.


river (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere river, riverside, river bank (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *riparia riverbank, seashore, river (source also of Spanish ribera, Italian riviera),
noun use of fem. of Latin riparius of a riverbank (see riparian). Generalized sense of a copious
flow of anything is from late 14c. The Old English word was ea river, cognate with Gothic ahwa,
Latin aqua (see aqua-). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense river bank as the main one,
or else the secondary Latin sense coast of the sea (compare Riviera).    U.S. slang phrase up the
river in prison (1891) is originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, which was literally up the
(Hudson) river from New York City. Phrase down the river done for, finished perhaps echoes sense in
sell down the river (1851), originally of troublesome slaves, to sell from the Upper South to the
harsher cotton plantations of the Deep South.


chicken (n.)

Old English cicen (plural cicenu) young fowl, which by early Middle English had came to mean young
chicken, then later any chicken, from Proto-Germanic *kiukinam (cognates: Middle Dutch kiekijen,
Dutch kieken, Old Norse kjuklingr, Swedish kyckling, German K&uuml;ken chicken), from root *keuk-
(echoic of the bird's sound and possibly also the root of cock (n.1)) + diminutive suffixes.
Applied to the young of other bird species from early 13c. Adjective sense of cowardly is at least
as old as 14c. (compare hen-herte a chicken-hearted person, mid-15c.). As the name of a game of
danger to test courage, it is first recorded 1953. Chicken feed paltry sum of money is by 1897,
American English slang; literal use (it is made from the from lowest quality of grain) by 1834.
Chicken lobster young lobster, is from c.1960s, American English, apparently from chicken in its
sense of young. Generic words for chicken in Indo-European tend to be extended uses of hen words, as
hens are more numerous among domestic fowl, but occasionally they are from words for the young, as
in English and in Latin pullus.


play (v.)

Old English plegan, plegian move rapidly, occupy or busy oneself, exercise; frolic; make sport of,
mock; perform music, from West Germanic *plegan occupy oneself about  (cognates: Old Saxon plegan
vouch for, take charge of, Old Frisian plega tend to, Middle Dutch pleyen to rejoice, be glad,
German pflegen take care of, cultivate), from PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself, forming words in
Celtic, Germanic, Slavic, and possibly Latin.    Meaning to take part in a game is from c.1200.
Opposed to work (v.) since late 14c. Related: Played; playing. To play up emphasize is from 1909; to
play down minimize is from 1930; to play along cooperate is from 1929. To play with oneself
masturbate is from 1896; play for keeps is from 1861, originally of marbles or other children's
games with tokens. To play second fiddle in the figurative sense is from 1809 (Gil Blas). To play
into the hands (of someone) is from 1705. To play the _______ card is attested from 1886; to play
fair is from mid-15c. To play (something) safe is from 1911; to play favorites is attested from
1902. For play the field see field (n.).


cousin (n.)

mid-12c., from Old French cosin (12c., Modern French cousin) nephew, kinsman, cousin, from Latin
consobrinus cousin, originally mother's sister's son, from com- together (see com-) + sobrinus
(earlier *sosrinos) cousin on mother's side, from soror (genitive sororis) sister.    Italian
cugino, Danish kusine, Polish kuzyn also are from French. German vetter is from Old High German
fetiro uncle, perhaps on the notion of child of uncle. Words for cousin tend to drift to nephew on
the notion of father's nephew.    Many IE languages (including Irish, Sanskrit, Slavic, and some of
the Germanic tongues) have or had separate words for some or all of the eight possible cousin
relationships, such as Latin, which along with consobrinus had consobrina mother's sister's
daughter, patruelis father's brother's son, atruelis mother's brother's son, amitinus father's
sister's son, etc. Old English distinguished f&aelig;deran sunu father's brother's son, modrigan
sunu mother's sister's son, etc.    Used familiarly as a term of address since early 15c.,
especially in Cornwall. Phrase kissing cousin is Southern U.S. expression, 1940s, apparently
denoting those close enough to be kissed in salutation; Kentish cousin (1796) is an old British term
for distant relative.


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


slut (n.)

c.1400, a dirty, slovenly, or untidy woman, according to OED Of doubtful origin, but probably
cognate with dialectal German Schlutt slovenly woman, dialectal Swedish slata idle woman, slut, and
Dutch slodde slut, slodder a careless man, but the exact relationship of all these is obscure.
Chaucer uses sluttish (late 14c.) in reference to the appearance of an untidy man. Also a kitchen
maid, a drudge (mid-15c.; hard pieces in a bread loaf from imperfect kneading were called slut's
pennies, 18c.).    Specific modern sense of woman who enjoys sex in a degree considered shamefully
excessive is by 1966. Meaning woman of loose character, bold hussy is attested from mid-15c., but
the primary association through 18c. was untidiness. Johnson has it (second definition) as A word of
slight contempt to a woman but sexual activity does not seem to figure into his examples. Playful
use of the word, without implication of messiness or loose morals, is attested by 1660s:    My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most
admirable slut, and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others, and deserves wages
better. [Pepys, diary, Feb. 21, 1664]    Compare playful use of scamp, etc., for boys. Sometimes
used 19c. as a euphemism for bitch to describe a female dog.    There is a group of North Sea
Germanic words in sl- that mean sloppy, and also slovenly woman and, less often, slovenly man, and
that tend to evolve toward woman of loose morals. Compare slattern, also English dialectal slummock
a dirty, untidy, or slovenly person (1861), variant of slammacks slatternly woman, said to be from
slam ill-shaped, shambling fellow. Also slammakin (from 1756 as a type of loose gown; 1785 as
slovenly female, 1727 as a character name in Gay's Beggar's Opera), with variants slamkin,
slammerkin. Also possibly related are Middle Dutch slore a sluttish woman, Dutch slomp, German
schlampe a slattern.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


