tension (n.)

1530s, a stretched condition, from Middle French tension (16c.) or directly from Latin tensionem
(nominative tensio) a stretching (in Medieval Latin a struggle, contest), noun of state from tensus,
past participle of tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- stretch (see tenet). The sense of nervous
strain is first recorded 1763. The meaning stress along lines of electromotive force (as in high-
tension wires) is recorded from 1785.


hypertension (n.)

1863, from hyper- + tension. Originally in medical use; of emotions or nerves, from 1936.


tensile (adj.)

1620s, stretchable, from Modern Latin tensilis capable of being stretched, from Latin tensus, past
participle of tendere to stretch (see tenet). Meaning pertaining to tension is from 1841.


tense (adj.)

stretched tight, 1660s, from Latin tensus, past participle of tendere to stretch, extend (see
tenet). Figurative sense of in a state of nervous tension is first recorded 1821. Related: Tensely;
tenseness.


tonic (adj.)

1640s, relating to or characterized by muscular tension, from Greek tonikos of stretching, from
tonos a stretching (see tenet). The meaning maintaining the healthy firmness of tissues is recorded
from 1680s, first extended 1756 to having the property of restoring to health. Related: Tonical
(1580s).


pylon (n.)

1823, gateway to an Egyptian temple, from Greek pylon gateway, from pyle gate, wing of a pair of
double gates; an entrance, entrance into a country; mountain pass; narrow strait of water, of
unknown origin. Meaning tower for guiding aviators (1909) led to that of steel tower for high-
tension wires (1923).


tetanus (n.)

infectious disease, late 14c., from Latin tetanus tetanus, from Greek tetanos tetanus, muscular
spasm, literally a stretching, tension, from teinein to stretch (see tenet); so called because the
disease is characterized by violent spasms and stiffness of the muscles [Barnhart]. Related:
Tetanoid (adj.).


telangiectasia (n.)

1831, Modern Latin, from Greek telos end (see tele-), + angeion vessel (see angio-), + ektasis a
stretching out, extension, dilation, from ek (see ex-) + tasis a stretching, tension, intensity (see
tenet).


relax (v.)

late 14c., to make (something) less compact or dense, from Old French relaschier set free; soften;
reduce (14c.), from Latin relaxare relax, loosen, open, stretch out, widen again; make loose, from
re- back (see re-) + laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax). Of persons, to become less formal,
from 1837. Meaning decrease tension is from early 15c.; intransitive sense of to become less tense
is recorded from 1935. Related: Relaxed; relaxing.


premenstrual (adj.)

also pre-menstrual, 1865, from pre- + menstrual. Premenstrual syndrome (1971) earlier was
premenstrual tension (1928).


jingo (n.)

mindless, gung-ho patriot, 1878, picked up from the refrain of a music hall song written by G.W.
Hunt, and sung by Gilbert H. MacDermott (1845-1901), supporting aggressive British policy toward
Russia at a time of international tension. (We don't want to fight, But by Jingo! if we do, We've
got the ships, we've got the men, We've got the money too.)    Hunt's patriotic song of 1878, with a
swinging tune ... became at Macdermott's instigation the watchword of the popular supporters of
England's bellicose policy. The Daily News on 11 March 1878 first dubbed the latter 'Jingoes' in
derision .... [Dictionary of National Biography, London, 1912]    As an asseveration, it was in
colloquial use since 1690s, and is apparently yet another euphemism for Jesus, influenced by
conjurer's gibberish presto-jingo (1660s). The frequent suggestion that it somehow derives from
Basque Jinko god is not impossible, but as yet unsupported by evidence [OED].


tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


