tenure (n.)

early 15c., holding of a tenement, from Anglo-French and Old French tenure a tenure, estate in land
(13c.), from Old French tenir to hold, from Vulgar Latin *tenire, from Latin tenere to hold (see
tenet). The sense of condition or fact of holding a status, position, or occupation is first
attested 1590s. Meaning guaranteed tenure of office (usually at a university or school) is recorded
from 1957. Related: Tenured (1961).


quit-rent (n.)

early 15c., rent paid by a tenant in exchange for being discharged from required service; also,
nominal rent as acknowledgment of tenure, from quit (adj.) + rent (n.).


mayoralty (n.)

late 14c., mairaltee office of a mayor (mid-15c. as tenure of a mayor), from Middle French
mairalt&#233;, from maire (see mayor) + -alte, as in principalte, reformed in English as -alty.


apron (n.)

mid-15c., faulty separation (as also in adder, umpire) of a napron (c.1300), from Old French naperon
small table-cloth, diminutive of nappe cloth, from Latin mappa napkin. Napron was still in use as
recently as late 16c. The shift of Latin -m- to -n- was a tendency in Old French (conter from
computare, printemps from primum, natte mat, matting, from matta). Symbolic of wife's business from
1610s. Apron-string tenure was in reference to property held in virtue of one's wife, or during her
lifetime only.Even at his age, he ought not to be always tied to his mother's apron string. [Anne
Bront&#235;, The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, 1848]


silhouette (n.)

1798, from French silhouette, in reference to &Eacute;tienne de Silhouette (1709-1767), French
minister of finance in 1759. Usually said to be so called because it was an inexpensive way of
making a likeness of someone, a derisive reference to Silhouette's petty economies to finance the
Seven Years' War, which were unpopular among the nobility. But other theories are that it refers to
his brief tenure in office, or the story that he decorated his chateau with such portraits.
Silhouette portraits were so called simply because they came into fashion in the year (1759) in
which M. de Silhouette was minister. [A. Brachet, An Etymological Dictionary of the French Language,
transl. G.W. Kitchin, 1882]    Used of any sort of dark outline or shadow in profile from 1843. The
verb is recorded from 1876, from the noun. The family name is a Frenchified form of a Basque
surname; Arnaud de Silhouette, the finance minister's father, was from Biarritz in the French Basque
country; the southern Basque form of the name would be Zuloeta or Zulueta, which contains the suffix
-eta abundance of and zulo hole (possibly here meaning cave).


loan (n.)

mid-13c., from Old Norse lan, related to lja to lend, from Proto-Germanic *laikhwniz (cognates: Old
Frisian len thing lent, Middle Dutch lene, Dutch leen loan, fief, Old High German lehan, German Lehn
fief, feudal tenure), originally to let have, to leave (to someone), from PIE *leikw- to leave (see
relinquish).    The Norse word also is cognate with Old English l&aelig;n gift, which did not
survive into Middle English, but its derived verb l&aelig;nan is the source of lend. As a verb, loan
is attested from 1540s, perhaps earlier, and formerly was current, but has now been supplanted in
England by lend, though it survives in American English.   Loan word (1874) is a translation of
German Lehnwort; loan-translation is attested 1933, from German Lehn&uuml;bersetzung. Slang loan
shark first attested 1900.


hooker (n.)

prostitute, often traced to the disreputable morals of the Army of the Potomac (American Civil War)
under the tenure of Gen. Fighting Joe Hooker (early 1863), and the word might have been popularized
by this association at that time (though evidence is wanting). But it is reported to have been in
use in North Carolina c.1845 ([I]f he comes by way of Norfolk he will find any number of pretty
Hookers in the Brick row not far from French's hotel. Take my advice and touch nothing in the shape
of a prostitute when you come through Raleigh, for in honest truth the clap is there of luxuriant
growth. letter quoted in Norman E. Eliason, Tarheel Talk, 1956).    One early theory traces it to
Corlear's Hook, a section of New York City.    HOOKER. A resident of the Hook, i.e. a strumpet, a
sailor's trull. So called from the number of houses of ill-fame frequented by sailors at the Hook
(i.e. Corlear's Hook) in the city of New York. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms,
1859]    Perhaps related to hooker thief, pickpocket (1560s), but most likely a reference to
prostitutes hooking or snaring clients. Hook in the figurative sense of that by which anyone is
attracted or caught is recorded from early 15c.; and hook (v.) in the figurative sense of catch hold
of and draw in is attested from 1570s; in reference to fishing for a husband or a wife, it was in
common use from c.1800. All of which makes the modern sense seem a natural step.  Compare French
accrocheuse, raccrocheuse, common slang term for street-walker, prostitute, literally hooker of men.
The family name Hooker (attested from c.975 C.E.) would mean maker of hooks, or else refer to an
agricultural laborer who used a hook (compare Old English weodhoc weed-hook).


