terminal (n.)

end point of a railway line, 1888, from terminal (adj.); sense of device for communicating with a
computer is first recorded 1954. Earlier final part of a word (1831).


terminal (adj.)

mid-15c., relating to or marking boundaries, from Latin terminalis pertaining to a boundary or end,
final, from terminus end, boundary line (see terminus). Meaning fatal (terminal illness) is first
recorded 1891. Sense of situated at the extreme end (of something) is from 1805. Slang meaning
extreme first recorded 1983. Related: Termninally.


coterminous (adj.)

1630s, malformed in English from co- + terminous (see terminal). Latin purists prefer conterminous.


grotto (n.)

1610s, from Italian grotta, ultimately from Latin crypta vault, cavern, from Greek krypte hidden
place (see crypt). Terminal -o may be from its being spelled that way in many translations of
Dante's Divine Comedy.


corpse (n.)

1540s, variant spelling of corps (q.v.). The -p- originally was silent, as in French, and with some
speakers still is. The terminal -e was rare before 19c. Corpse-candle is attested from 1690s.


already (adv.)

c.1300, compound of all + ready (adj.); literally fully ready. Compare Norwegian, Danish allerede
already. Colloquial use in U.S. as a terminal emphatic (as in enough, already!) is attested from
1903, translating Yiddish shoyn, which is used in same sense. The pattern also is attested in
Pennsylvania German and in South African.


shoal (n.1)

place of shallow water, c.1300, from Old English schealde (adj.), from sceald shallow, from Proto-
Germanic *skala- (cognates: Swedish sk&auml;ll thin; Low German schol, Frisian skol not deep), of
uncertain origin. The terminal -d was dropped 16c.


vitamin (n.)

1920, originally vitamine (1912) coined by Polish biochemist Casimir Funk (1884-1967), from Latin
vita life (see vital) + amine, because they were thought to contain amino acids. The terminal -e
formally was stripped off when scientists learned the true nature of the substance; -in was
acceptable because it was used for neutral substances of undefined composition. The lettering system
of nomenclature (Vitamin A, B, C, etc.) was introduced at the same time (1920).


graft (n.1)

shoot inserted into another plant, late 15c. alteration of Middle English graff (late 14c.), from
Old French graife grafting knife, carving tool, stylus, from Latin graphium stylus, from Greek
grapheion stylus, from graphein to write (see -graphy). So called probably on resemblance of a
stylus to the pencil-shaped shoots used in grafting. The terminal -t- in the English word is not
explained. Surgical sense is from 1871.


interminable (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin interminabilis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + terminabilis, from
terminalis (see terminal (adj.)). Related: Interminably.


I.H.S.

Old English, from Medieval Latin, representing Greek abbreviation of IHSOUS Jesus, in which -H- is
the capital of the Greek vowel eta. The Roman form would be I.E.S. Mistaken for a Latin contraction
in the Middle Ages, after its Greek origin was forgotten, and sometimes treated as short for Iesus
Hominum Salvator Jesus Savior of Men. Alternative version I.H.C. (terminal -s- often written in
later Greek with a character resembling -c-) is found on vestments from 950 C.E., and may be the
source of the H. in slang Jesus H. Christ.


eve (n.)

evening, Old English &aelig;fen, with pre-1200 loss of terminal -n (which was mistaken for an
inflection), from Proto-Germanic *&aelig;bando- (cognates: Old Saxon aband, Old Frisian ewnd, Dutch
avond, Old High German aband, German Abend, Old Norse aptann, Danish aften), of uncertain origin.
Now superseded in its original sense by evening. Meaning day before a saint's day or festival is
from late 13c.


lend (v.)

late 14c., from Old English l&aelig;nan to lend, from l&aelig;n loan (see loan). Cognate with Dutch
lenen, Old High German lehanon, German lehnen, also verbs derived from nouns. Past tense form, with
terminal -d, became the principal form in Middle English on analogy of bend, send, etc.


though (adv., conj.)

c.1200, from Old English &thorn;eah though, although, even if, however, nevertheless, although,
still, yet; and in part from Old Norse &thorn;o though, both from Proto-Germanic *thaukh (cognates:
Gothic &thorn;auh, Old Frisian thach, Middle Dutch, Dutch doch, Old High German doh, German doch),
from PIE demonstrative pronoun *to- (see that). The evolution of the terminal sound did not follow
laugh, tough, etc., though a tendency to end the word in f existed c.1300-1750 and persists in
dialects.


hush (v.)

1540s, variant of Middle English huisht (late 14c.), probably of imitative origin, with terminal -t
lost probably by being mistaken for a past tense suffix. Hush-hush (adj.) is 1916 reduplication.
Related: Hushed; hushing. The noun is attested from 1680s. As an interjection meaning be quiet,
attested by c.1600. To hush (one's) mouth be quiet is attested from 1878. Hush up suppress talk for
secrecy's sake is from 1630s. Hush-money is attested from 1709. Hush-puppy deep-fried ball of
cornmeal batter first attested 1899; as a type of lightweight soft shoe, it is a proprietary name,
registered 1961.


account (n.)

c.1300, reckoning of money received and paid, from Old French acont account, reckoning, terminal
payment, from a to (see ad-) + cont counting, reckoning of money to be paid, from Late Latin
computus a calculation, from Latin computare calculate (see compute).    Meaning sum of (one's)
money in a bank is from 1833. Sense of narration is first attested 1610s. Plural accounts used as a
collective or singular in phrases such as to give accounts (of something), is from mid-13c. Phrase
by all accounts is attested from 1798.


hasty (adj.)

mid-14c., speedy, quick, by 1500s replacing or nativizing earlier hastif (c.1300) eager, impetuous,
from Old French hastif speedy, rapid; forward, advanced; rash, impetuous (12c., Modern French
h&acirc;tif), from haste (see haste). Meaning requiring haste is late 14c. (the sense in hasty
pudding, 1590s, so called because it was made quickly); that of rash is from early 15c. Related:
Hastiness. Old French also had a form hasti (for loss of terminal -f, compare joli/jolif, etc.),
which may have influenced the form of the English word.    The termination was doubtless from the
first identified with native -i, -y, from OE -ig; and it is noticeable that the other Teutonic
langs. have formed corresponding adjs. of that type: Du. haastig, Ger., Da., Sw. hastig. [OED]


steward (n.)

Old English stiward, stigweard house guardian, housekeeper, from stig hall, pen for cattle, part of
a house (see sty (n.1)) + weard guard (see ward (n.)). Used after the Conquest as the equivalent of
Old French seneschal (q.v.). Meaning overseer of workmen is attested from c.1300. The sense of
officer on a ship in charge of provisions and meals is first recorded mid-15c.; extended to trains
1906. This was the title of a class of high officers of the state in early England and Scotland,
hence meaning one who manages affairs of an estate on behalf of his employer (late 14c.). Meaning
person who supervises arrangements at a meeting, dinner, etc., is from 1703.    The Scottish form
(with terminal -t attested from late 14c.) is reflected in Stewart, name of the royal house
descended from Walter (the) Steward, who married (1315) Marjorie de Bruce, daughter of King Robert.
Stuart is a French spelling, attested from 1429 and adopted by Mary, Queen of Scots.


rhyme (n.)

agreement in terminal sounds, 1560s, partially restored spelling, from Middle English ryme, rime
(c.1200) measure, meter, rhythm, later rhymed verse (mid-13c.), from Old French rime (fem.), related
to Old Proven&ccedil;al rim (masc.), earlier *ritme, from Latin rithmus, from Greek rhythmos
measured motion, time, proportion (see rhythm).    In Medieval Latin, rithmus was used for
accentual, as opposed to quantitative, verse, and accentual verse usually was rhymed, hence the
sense shift. Persistence of older form is due to popular association with Old English rim number,
from PIE root *re(i)- to reason, count (see read (v.)). Phrase rhyme or reason good sense (chiefly
used in the negative) is from late 15c. (see reason (n.)). Rhyme scheme is attested from 1931. Rhyme
royal (1841) is a stanza of seven 10-syllable lines rhymed a-b-a-b-b-c-c.


sound (n.1)

noise, what is heard, sensation produced through the ear, late 13c., soun, from Old French son
sound, musical note, voice, from Latin sonus sound, a noise, from PIE *swon-o-, from root *swen- to
sound (cognates: Sanskrit svanati it sounds, svanah sound, tone; Latin sonare to sound; Old Irish
senim the playing of an instrument; Old English geswin music, song, swinsian to sing; Old Norse
svanr, Old English swan swan, properly the sounding bird).    The terminal -d was established
c.1350-1550 as part of a tendency to add -d- after -n-. First record of sound barrier is from 1939.
Sound check is from 1977; sound effects is 1909, originally live accompaniments to silent films.
The experts of Victor ... will ... arrange for the synchronized orchestration and sound effects for
this picture, in which airplane battles will have an important part. [Exhibitor's Herald &amp;
Moving Picture World, April 28, 1928]


bishop (n.)

Old English bisceop bishop, high priest (Jewish or pagan), from Late Latin episcopus, from Greek
episkopos watcher, overseer, a title for various government officials, later taken over in a Church
sense, from epi- over (see epi-) + skopos one that watches, one that looks after; a guardian,
protector (see scope (n.1)). Given a specific sense in the Church, but the word also was used in the
New Testament as a descriptive title for elders, and continues as such in some non-hierarchical
Christian sects.    A curious example of word-change, as effected by the genius of different
tongues, is furnished by the English bishop and the French &#233;v&#234;que. Both are from the same
root, furnishing, perhaps the only example of two words from a common stem so modifying themselves
in historical times as not to have a letter in common. (Of course many words from a far off Aryan
stem are in the same condition.) The English strikes off the initial and terminal syllables, leaving
only piscop, which the Saxon preference for the softer labial and hissing sounds modified into
bishop. &#201;v&#234;que (formerly evesque) merely softens the p into v and drops the last syllable.
[William S. Walsh, Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, Philadelphia, J.B. Lippincott, 1892]    Late
Latin episcopus in Spanish became obispo. Cognate with Old Saxon biscop, Old High German biscof. The
chess piece (formerly archer, before that alfin) was so called from 1560s.


