termination (n.)

late 14c., authoritative resolution of a matter, from Old French terminacion (13c.) and directly
from Latin terminationem (nominative terminatio) a fixing of boundaries, a bounding, determining,
noun of action from past participle stem of terminare to limit, end (see terminus). Meaning end of a
person's employment is recorded from 1961; meaning artificial end of a pregnancy is attested from
1969; sense of assasination is recorded from 1975.


expiry (n.)

close, termination, 1752, from expire + -y (4). Meaning dying, death is from 1790.


close (n.)

late 14c., act of closing, conclusion, termination, from close (v.). Also in early use enclosure,
enclosed space (late 13c.), from Old French clos, noun use of past participle.


expiration (n.)

early 15c., vapor, breath, from Middle French expiration, from Latin expirationem/exspirationem
(nominative expiratio/exspiratio), noun of action from past participle stem of expirare/exspirare
(see expire). Meaning termination, end, close is from 1560s.


suffragette (n.)

female supporter of the cause of women's voting rights, 1906, from suffrage, with French fem. ending
-ette, but not in the sense in which it was in vogue at the time.   <b>suffragette</b>. A more
regrettable formation than others such as leaderette &amp; flannelette, in that it does not even
mean a sort of suffrage as they mean a sort of leader &amp; of flannel, &amp; therefore tends to
vitiate the popular conception of the termination's meaning. The word itself may now be expected to
die, having lost its importance; may its influence on word-making die with it! [Fowler, 1926]
Compare suffragist.


fine (n.)

c.1200, termination, from Old French fin end, limit, boundary; death; fee, payment, finance, money
(10c.), from Medieval Latin finis a payment in settlement, fine or tax, from Latin finis end (see
finish (v.)).    Modern meaning is via sense of sum of money paid for exemption from punishment or
to compensate for injury (mid-14c., from the same sense in Anglo-French, late 13c.) and from phrases
such as to make fine make one's peace, settle a matter (c.1300). Meaning sum of money imposed as
penalty for some offense is first recorded 1520s.


clause (n.)

c.1200, a sentence, a brief statement, a short passage, from Old French clause stipulation (in a
legal document), 12c., from Medieval Latin clausa conclusion, used in the sense of classical Latin
clausula the end, a closing, termination, also end of a sentence or a legal argument, from clausa,
fem. noun from past participle of claudere to close, to shut, to conclude (see close (v.)).
Grammatical sense is from c.1300. Legal meaning distinct condition, stipulation, or proviso is
recorded from late 14c. in English. The sense of ending seems to have fallen from the word between
Latin and French.


chaperon (n.)

1720, woman accompanying a younger, unmarried lady in public, from French chaperon protector,
especially female companion to a young woman, earlier head covering, hood (c.1400), from Old French
chaperon hood, cowl (12c.), diminutive of chape cape (see cap (n.)). ... English writers often
erroneously spell it chaperone, app. under the supposition that it requires a fem. termination
[OED]. The notion is of covering the socially vulnerable one.  May I ask what is a chaperon?    A
married lady; without whom no unmarried one can be seen in public. If the damsel be five and forty,
she cannot appear without the matron; and if the matron be fifteen, it will do.    [Catharine
Hutton, The Welsh Mountaineer, London, 1817]    The word had been used in Middle English in the
literal sense hooded cloak.


chaparral (n.)

shrub thicket, 1850, American English, from Spanish chaparro evergreen oak, perhaps from Basque
txapar little thicket, diminutive of sapar heath, thicket.    In Spain, a chaparral   is a bush of a
species of oak. The termination al signifies a place abounding in; as, chaparral, a place of oak-
bushes, almendral, an almond orchard; parral, a vineyard; cafetal, a coffee plantation, etc., etc.
This word, chaparral, has been introduced into the language since our acquisition of Texas and New
Mexico, where these bushes abound. It is a series of thickets, of various sizes, from one hundred
yards to a mile through, with bushes and briars, all covered with thorns, and so closely entwined
together as almost to prevent the passage of any thing larger than a wolf or hare. [John Russell
Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]


hasty (adj.)

mid-14c., speedy, quick, by 1500s replacing or nativizing earlier hastif (c.1300) eager, impetuous,
from Old French hastif speedy, rapid; forward, advanced; rash, impetuous (12c., Modern French
h&acirc;tif), from haste (see haste). Meaning requiring haste is late 14c. (the sense in hasty
pudding, 1590s, so called because it was made quickly); that of rash is from early 15c. Related:
Hastiness. Old French also had a form hasti (for loss of terminal -f, compare joli/jolif, etc.),
which may have influenced the form of the English word.    The termination was doubtless from the
first identified with native -i, -y, from OE -ig; and it is noticeable that the other Teutonic
langs. have formed corresponding adjs. of that type: Du. haastig, Ger., Da., Sw. hastig. [OED]


