terminology (n.)

1770, from German Terminologie, a hybrid coined by Christian Gottfried Sch&uuml;tz (1747-1832),
professor of poetry and rhetoric at Jena, from Medieval Latin terminus word, expression (see
terminus) + Greek -logia a dealing with, a speaking of (see -logy). Related: Terminological.


-ene

hydrocarbon suffix, from Greek name-forming element -ene. It has no real meaning in itself; in
chemistry terminology probably abstracted from methylene (1834). Put in systematic use by Hofmann
(1865).


incinerator (n.)

1883, American English, originally in the terminology of cremation, from incinerate + Latinate agent
noun suffix -or. Meaning device for waste disposal by burning is from 1889.


technological (adj.)

1620s, in reference to terminology, from technology + -ical. Meaning of or relating to technology
from 1800. Related: Technologically.


Anasazi

Name applied by their Navajo neighbors to modern Pueblo peoples of the U.S. southwest, and to
various landscape features associated with them, from Navajo anaasazi ancestors of the enemies. Said
to first have been applied to the ancient Pueblo ruins of southwestern United States in the Mesa
Verde region c.1889 by rancher and trader Richard Wetherill, who began exploration of the sites in
the area; established in archaeological terminology 1927.


subjectivity (n.)

1803, from subjective + -ity. Popularized in Kantian terminology; compare French subjectivit&#233;,
German subjektivit&#228;t.


histo-

medical word-forming element, from Greek histos warp, web, literally anything set upright, from
histasthai to stand, from PIE *sta- to stand (see stet). Taken by 19c. medical writers as the best
Greek root from which to form terminology for tissue.


binary (adj.)

dual, mid-15c., from Late Latin binarius consisting of two, from bini twofold, two apiece, two-by-
two (used especially of matched things), from bis double (see bis-). Binary code in computer
terminology was in use by 1952, though the idea itself is ancient. Binary star in astronomy is from
1802.


-osis

word-forming element expressing state or condition, in medical terminology denoting a state of
disease, from Latin -osis and directly from Greek -osis, formed from the aorist of verbs ending in
-o. It corresponds to Latin -atio.


Mir

late 20c. space station, from Russian, literally peace, world, also village, community, from Old
Church Slavonic miru peace, from Proto-Slavic *miru commune, joy, peace (possibly borrowed from
Iranian [Watkins]), from PIE root *mei- to bind (see mitre). Old Church Slavonic miru was used in
Christian terminology as a collective 'community of peace'  [Buck], translating Greek kosmos. Hence,
the known world, mankind.


nomenclature (n.)

c.1600, a name, from Middle French nomenclature (16c.), from Latin nomenclatura calling of names,
from nomenclator namer, from nomen name (see name (n.)) + calator caller, crier, from calare call
out (see claim (v.)).   Nomenclator in Rome was the title of a steward whose job was to announce
visitors, and also of a prompter who helped a stumping politician recall names and pet causes of his
constituents. Meaning list or catalogue of names first attested 1630s; that of system of naming is
from 1660s; sense of terminology of a science is from 1789.


cardiac (adj.)

c.1600, from French cardiaque (14c.) or directly from Latin cardiacus, from Greek kardiakos
pertaining to the heart, from kardia heart (see heart (n.)). Cardiac arrest is attested from 1950.
Greek kardia also could mean stomach and Latin cardiacus pertaining to the stomach. This terminology
continues somewhat in modern medicine. Confusion of heart and nearby digestive organs also is
reflected in Breton kalon heart, from Old French cauldun bowels, and English heartburn for
indigestion.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


