terminus (n.)

1550s, goal, end, final point, from Latin terminus (plural termini) end, boundary line, from PIE
*ter-men-, from root *ter-, base of words meaning peg, post, boundary, marker, goal (cognates:
Sanskrit tarati passes over, crosses over, tarantah sea; Hittite tarmaizzi he limits; Greek terma
boundary, end, limit; Gothic &#254;airh, Old English &#254;urh through; Old English &#254;yrel hole;
Old Norse &#254;r&#246;mr edge, chip, splinter).    In ancient Rome, Terminus was the name of the
deity who presided over boundaries and landmarks, focus of the important Roman festival of
Terminalia (held Feb. 23, the end of the old Roman year). Meaning either end of a transportation
line is first recorded 1836.


terminology (n.)

1770, from German Terminologie, a hybrid coined by Christian Gottfried Sch&uuml;tz (1747-1832),
professor of poetry and rhetoric at Jena, from Medieval Latin terminus word, expression (see
terminus) + Greek -logia a dealing with, a speaking of (see -logy). Related: Terminological.


conterminous (adj.)

1670s, from Latin conterminus bordering upon, having a common boundary, from com- together, with
(see com-) + terminus (see terminus).


determine (v.)

mid-14c., to come to an end, also to settle, decide (late 14c.), from Old French determiner (12c.)
or directly from Latin determinare to enclose, bound, set limits to, from de- off (see de-) +
terminare to mark the end or boundary, from terminus end, limit (see terminus). Sense of coming to a
firm decision (to do something) is from mid-15c. Related: Determined; determining; determiner.


terminal (adj.)

mid-15c., relating to or marking boundaries, from Latin terminalis pertaining to a boundary or end,
final, from terminus end, boundary line (see terminus). Meaning fatal (terminal illness) is first
recorded 1891. Sense of situated at the extreme end (of something) is from 1805. Slang meaning
extreme first recorded 1983. Related: Termninally.


term (n.)

c.1200, terme limit in time, set or appointed period, from Old French terme limit of time or place,
date, appointed time, duration (11c.), from Latin terminus end, boundary line, in Medieval Latin
expression, definition, related to termen boundary, end (see terminus). Old English had termen term,
end, from Latin. Sense of period of time during which something happens first recorded c.1300,
especially of a school or law court session (mid-15c.).    The meaning word or phrase used in a
limited or precise sense is first recorded late 14c., from Medieval Latin use of terminus to render
Greek horos boundary, employed in mathematics and logic. Hence in terms of in the language or
phraseology peculiar to. Meaning completion of the period of pregnancy is from 1844. Term-paper in
U.S. educational sense is recorded from 1931.


terminator (n.)

1770, line of separation between the bright and dark parts of a moon or planet, from Late Latin
terminator he who sets bounds, agent noun from terminare (see terminus). Meaning one who terminates
(something) is attested from 1846.


terminate (v.)

early 15c., bring to an end, from Latin terminatus, past participle of terminare to limit, set
bounds, end (see terminus). Intransitive sense of to come to an end is recorded from 1640s; meaning
dismiss from a job is recorded from 1973; that of to assassinate is from 1975. Related: Terminated;
terminating.


terminer (n.)

a determining, legal term, from French terminer to end, in Old French to decide, rule on, from Latin
terminare (see terminus; also see oyer).


termination (n.)

late 14c., authoritative resolution of a matter, from Old French terminacion (13c.) and directly
from Latin terminationem (nominative terminatio) a fixing of boundaries, a bounding, determining,
noun of action from past participle stem of terminare to limit, end (see terminus). Meaning end of a
person's employment is recorded from 1961; meaning artificial end of a pregnancy is attested from
1969; sense of assasination is recorded from 1975.


exterminate (v.)

1540s, drive away, from Latin exterminatus, past participle of exterminare drive out, expel, drive
beyond boundaries, also, in Late Latin destroy, from phrase ex termine beyond the boundary, from ex-
out of (see ex-) + termine, ablative of termen boundary, limit, end (see terminus).    Meaning
destroy utterly is from 1640s in English, a sense found in equivalent words in French and in the
Vulgate; earlier in this sense was extermine (mid-15c.). Related: Exterminated; exterminating.


yard (n.1)

patch of ground around a house, Old English geard fenced enclosure, garden, court; residence, house,
from Proto-Germanic *gardaz (cognates: Old Norse gar&eth;r enclosure, garden, yard; Old Frisian
garda, Dutch gaard, Old High German garto, German Garten garden; Gothic gards house, garda stall),
from PIE *ghor-to-, suffixed form of root *gher- (1) to grasp, enclose, with derivatives meaning
enclosure (cognates: Old English gyrdan to gird, Sanskrit ghra- house, Albanian garth hedge, Latin
hortus garden, Phrygian -gordum town, Greek khortos pasture, Old Irish gort field, Breton garz
enclosure, garden, and second element in Latin cohors enclosure, yard, company of soldiers,
multitude).    Lithuanian gardas pen, enclosure, Old Church Slavonic gradu town, city, and Russian
gorod, -grad town, city belong to this group, but linguists dispute whether they are independent
developments or borrowings from Germanic. As college campus enclosed by the main buildings, 1630s.
In railway usage, ground adjacent to a train station or terminus, used for switching or coupling
trains, 1827. Yard sale is attested by 1976.


