terrestrial (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to the earth, with + -al (1) + from Latin terrestris earthly, of the
earth, on land, from terra earth (see terrain). Originally opposed to celestial; natural history
sense of living on land is attested from 1630s. The noun meaning a human being, a mortal is recorded
from 1590s.


extraterrestrial (adj.)

also extra-terrestrial, 1812, from extra- + terrestrial. As a noun from 1956.


equator (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin aequator diei et noctis equalizer of day and night (when the sun is
on the celestial equator, twice annually, day and night are of equal length), agent noun from Latin
aequare make equal (see equate). Sense of celestial equator is earliest, extension to terrestrial
line midway between the poles first recorded in English 1610s.


terrene (adj.)

earthly, terrestrial, of or pertaining to the earth, c.1300, from Anglo-French terreine, Old French
terrien, from Latin terrenus on the earth, earthly, from terra earth (see terrain).


temporal (adj.)

late 14c., worldly, secular; also terrestrial, earthly; temporary, lasting only for a time, from Old
French temporal earthly, and directly from from Latin temporalis of a time, but for a time,
temporary, from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season, proper time or season, of unknown origin.
Related: Temporally.


mercury (n.)

silver-white fluid metallic element, late 14c., from Medieval Latin mercurius, from Latin Mercurius
(see Mercury). Prepared from cinnabar, it was one of the seven metals (bodies terrestrial) known to
the ancients, which were coupled in astrology and alchemy with the seven known heavenly bodies. This
one probably so associated for its mobility. The others were Sun/gold, Moon/silver, Mars/iron,
Saturn/lead, Jupiter/tin, Venus/copper. The Greek name for it was hydrargyros liquid silver, which
gives the element its symbol, Hg. Compare quicksilver.


sphere (n.)

mid-15c., Latinized spelling of Middle English spere (c.1300) cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow
globe about the world, from Anglo-French espiere, Old French espere (13c., Modern French
sph&#232;re), from Latin sphaera globe, ball, celestial sphere (Medieval Latin spera), from Greek
sphaira globe, ball, playing ball, terrestrial globe, of unknown origin.    From late 14c. in
reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos
believed to revolve around the earth and contain the planets and the fixed stars; the supposed
harmonious sound they made rubbing against one another was the music of the spheres (late 14c.).
Also from late 14c. as a globe; object of spherical form, a ball, and the geometric sense solid
figure with all points equidistant from the center. Meaning range of something, place or scene of
activity is first recorded c.1600 (as in sphere of influence, 1885, originally in reference to
Anglo-German colonial rivalry in Africa).


reptile (n.)

late 14c., creeping or crawling animal, from Old French reptile (early 14c.) and directly from Late
Latin reptile, noun use of neuter of reptilis (adj.) creping, crawling, from rept-, past participle
stem of repere to crawl, creep, from PIE root *rep- to creep, crawl (cognates: Lithuanian replioju
to creep). Used of persons of low character from 1749.    Precise scientific use began to develop
mid-18c., but the word was used as well at first of animals now known as amphibians, including
toads, frogs, salamanders; separation of Reptilia (1835 as a distinct class) and Amphibia took place
early 19c.; popular use lagged, and reptile still was used late 18c. with sense An animal that
creeps upon many feet [Johnson, who calls the scorpion a reptile], sometimes excluding serpents.
And the terrestrial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or beasts, reptiles, which have many
feet, and serpents, which have no feet at all. [Locke, Elements of Natural Philosophy, 1689]   <hr
/>   An inadvertent step may crush the snail  That crawls at ev'ning in the public path ;  But he
that has humanity, forewarn'd,  Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.  [Cowper, The Task,
1785]    The Old English word for reptile was slincend, related to slink.


