theoretical (adj.)

1610s, contemplative, with -al (1) + Late Latin theoreticus of or pertaining to theory, from Greek
theoretikos contemplative, speculative, pertaining to theory (by Aristotle contrasted to praktikos),
from theoretos that may be seen or considered, from theorein to consider, look at (see theory).
Meaning pertaining to theory, making deductions from theory not from fact (opposed to practical) is
from 1650s; earlier in this sense was theorical (c.1500). Meaning ideal, hypothetical is from 1790s
(implied in theoretically). Related: theoretician.


global warming (n.)

by 1983 as the name for a condition of overall rising temperatures and attendant consequences as a
result of human activity. Originally theoretical, popularized as a reality from 1989.


propeller (n.)

1780, anything that propels, agent noun from propel. In mechanical sense, 1809, of ships; of flying
machines (in a broad, theoretical sense) 1842, in the specific modern sense 1853.


Einstein (n.)

as a type-name for a genius, 1920, in reference to German-born theoretical physicist Albert Einstein
(1879-1955). According to German-American Names (George F. Jones, 3rd ed., 2006) it means literally
place encompassed by a stone wall.


biplane (n.)

airplane with two full wings, one above the other, 1874, as a theoretical notion; first attested
1908 in reference to the real thing; from bi- + plane (n.1). So called from the two planes of the
double wings.


applied (adj.)

put to practical use, (as opposed to abstract or theoretical), 1650s, from past participle of apply.
Earlier it was used in a sense of folded (c.1500).


telephonic (adj.)

1830, pertaining to communication by sound over great distances, originally theoretical, from tele-
+ phonic. From 1834 in reference to the system of Sudr&eacute; using musical sounds (see telephone),
and with reference to Bell's invention from 1876, in which cases it can be taken as from telephone +
-ic.


academic (adj.)

1580s, relating to an academy, also collegiate, scholarly, from Latin academicus of the Academy,
from academia (see academy). Meaning theoretical, not practical, not leading to a decision (such as
university debates or classroom legal exercises) is from 1886. Academic freedom is attested from
1901. Related: Academically.


speculative (adj.)

late 14c., contemplative, also purely scientific, in theory only (opposed to practical), from Old
French speculatif worth great attention; theoretical, or directly from Late Latin speculativus, from
past participle stem of speculari (see speculation). Meaning given to (financial) speculation is
from 1763. Related: Speculatively.


practic (n.)

late 14c., a way of doing something, method; practice, custom, usage; also an applied science; from
Old French practique practice, usage (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin practica practice,
practical knowledge, ultimately from Greek praktike practical (as opposed to theoretical; see
practical). From early 15c. as practical aspect or application of something; practice as opposed to
theory; also, knowledge of the practical aspect of something, practical experience.


nucleus (n.)

1704, kernel of a nut, 1708, head of a comet, from Latin nucleus kernel, from nucula little nut,
diminutive of nux (genitive nucis) nut, from PIE *kneu- nut (cognates: Middle Irish cnu, Welsh
cneuen, Middle Breton knoen nut, Old Norse hnot, Old English hnutu nut). General sense of central
part or thing, about which others cluster is from 1762. Use in reference to cells first recorded
1831. Modern atomic meaning is 1912, first by Ernest Rutherford, though theoretical use for central
point of an atom is from 1844, in Faraday.


protein (n.)

1844, from French prot&eacute;ine, coined 1838 by Dutch chemist Gerhard Johan Mulder (1802-1880),
perhaps on suggestion of Berzelius, from Greek proteios the first quality, from protos first (see
proto-) + -ine (2).    Originally a theoretical substance thought to be essential to life, further
studies of the substances he was working with overthrew this, but the words protein and proteid
continued to be used in international work on the matter and also for other organic compounds; the
modern use as a general name for a class of bodies arose in German. The confusion became so great a
committee was set up in 1907 to sort out the nomenclature, which it did, giving protein its modern
meaning and banishing proteid.


computer (n.)

1640s, one who calculates, agent noun from compute (v.). Meaning calculating machine (of any type)
is from 1897; in modern use, programmable digital electronic computer (1945 under this name;
theoretical from 1937, as Turing machine). ENIAC (1946) usually is considered the first. Computer
literacy is recorded from 1970; an attempt to establish computerate (adjective, on model of
literate) in this sense in the early 1980s didn't catch on. Computerese the jargon of programmers is
from 1960, as are computerize and computerization.    WASHINGTON (AP) -- A New York Congressman says
the use of computers to record personal data on individuals, such as their credit background, is
just frightening to me. [news article, March 17, 1968]


practical (adj.)

early 15c., practicale of or pertaining to matters of practice; applied, with -al (1) + earlier
practic (adj.) dealing with practical matters, applied, not merely theoretical (early 15c.), or
practic (n.) method, practice, use (late 14c.). In some cases directly from Old French practique
(adj.) fit for action, earlier pratique (13c.) and Medieval Latin practicalis, from Late Latin
practicus practical, active, from Greek praktikos fit for action, fit for business; business-like,
practical; active, effective, vigorous, from praktos done; to be done, verbal adjective of prassein,
prattein to do, act, effect, accomplish.


television (n.)

1907, as a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires; formed in
English or borrowed from French t&eacute;l&eacute;vision, from tele- + vision.    Television is not
impossible in theory. In practice it would be very costly without being capable of serious
application. But we do not want that. On that day when it will be possible to accelerate our methods
of telephotography by at least ten times, which does not appear to be impossible in the future, we
shall arrive at television with a hundred telegraph wires. Then the problem of sight at a distance
will without doubt cease to be a chimera. [Telegraphing Pictures in Windsor Magazine, 1907]    Other
proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were
telephote (1880) and televista (1904). The technology was developed in the 1920s and '30s. Nativized
in German as Fernsehen. Shortened form TV is from 1948. Meaning a television set is from 1941.
Meaning television as a medium is from 1927.  Television is the first truly democratic culture --
the first culture available to everyone and entirely governed by what the people want. The most
terrifying thing is what people do want. [Clive Barnes, New York Times, Dec. 30, 1969]


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


