theology (n.)

mid-14c., the science of religion, study of God and his relationship to humanity, from Old French
theologie philosophical study of Christian doctrine; Scripture (14c.), from Latin theologia, from
Greek theologia an account of the gods, from theologos one discoursing on the gods, from theos god
(see theo-) + -logos treating of (see -logy). Meaning a particular system of theology is from
1660s.Theology moves back and forth between two poles, the eternal truth of its foundations and the
temporal situation in which the eternal truth must be received. [Paul Tillich, Systematic Theology,
1951]


dunce (n.)

dullard, 1570s, from earlier Duns disciple follower of John Duns Scotus (c.1265-1308), Scottish
scholar of philosophy and theology supposed to have been born at Duns in Berwickshire. By 16c.,
humanist reaction against medieval theology singled him out as the type of the hairsplitting
scholastic. It became a general term of reproach applied to more conservative philosophical
opponents by 1520s, later extended to any dull-witted student.


theological (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to theology, from Medieval Latin theologicalis, from Latin theologicus, from
theologia (see theology). Related: Theologically.


mystic (n.)

exponent of mystical theology, 1670s, from mystic (adj.). In Middle English, the noun meant symbolic
meaning, interpretation (early 14c.).


absolutism (n.)

1753 in theology; 1830 in politics, in which sense it was first used by British reformer and
parliamentarian Maj. Gen. Thomas Perronet Thompson (1783-1869). See absolute and   -ism.


synergist (n.)

1650s, in theology, one who holds the doctrine of synergism (q.v.); from 1876 in medicine. For
ending, see -ist.


historicism (n.)

1895, translating German historismus, from historic + -ism. Given various senses 20c. in theology,
philosophy, architecture, etc.


universalism (n.)

1805 in theology, the doctrine of universal salvation, from universal (adj.) + -ism. Universalist
one who, professing the Christian faith, believes in the eventual redemption of all humanity is
attested from 1620s.


S.T.D.

1975 as an abbreviation of sexually transmitted disease. Earlier it was an abbreviation of Latin
Sacrosanctae Theologiae Doctor Doctor of Sacred Theology.


modernism (n.)

1737, deviation from the ancient and classical manner [Johnson, who calls it a word invented by
Swift], from modern + -ism. From 1830 as modern ways and styles. Used in theology since 1901. As a
movement in the arts (away from classical or traditional modes), from 1929.


ananda (n.)

in Hindu theology, bliss, from Sanskrit ananda- joy, happiness, bliss, from stem of nandati he
rejoices, of unknown origin.


theologian (n.)

late 15c., from Old French theologien (14c.), from theologie; see theology. A petty or paltry
theologist is a theologaster (1620s), used in Medieval Latin by Martin Luther (1518).


determinism (n.)

1846, in theology (lack of free will); 1876 in general sense of doctrine that everything  happens by
a necessary causation, from French d&eacute;terminisme, from German Determinismus, perhaps a back-
formation from Praedeterminismus (see determine).


mullah (n.)

title given in Muslim lands to one learned in theology and sacred law, 1610s, from Turkish molla,
Persian and Urdu mulla, from Arabic mawla master, from waliya reigned, governed.


synergistic (adj.)

1818 in theology; 1876 in medicine, from synergist + -ic. General sense of cooperative is from 1965.
Related: Synergistical (1650s); synergistically.


hamartiology (n.)

that part of theology which deals with sin, 1875, from Greek hamartia sin (see hamartia) + -ology.


glorification (n.)

mid-15c. as a term in alchemy, action of refining; state of being refined, from Late Latin
glorificationem (nominative glorificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of glorificare
(see glorify). From c.1500 in theology; general sense by mid-19c.


theologist (n.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin theologista, agent noun from theologizare, from Latin theologia (see
theology). Earlier in the same sense was theologician (1550s).


charismatic (adj.)

1851, in Bible commentary and theology, in reference to the operation of the Holy Spirit and
prophetic ecstasy in the early Church (from the use of Greek kharismata in Rom. xii), from Latin
stem of charisma + -ic. As a movement in modern Christian churches which believes in divine gifts of
healing, etc., attested by 1936, reflecting the older sense of charisma.


consubstantial (adj.)

late 15c., a term in the theology of the trinity, from Church Latin consubstantialis, from com- with
(see com-) + substantia (see substance). In general use from 1570s. Related: Consubstantiality.


eschatology (n.)

1844, from Greek eskhatos last, furthest, uttermost, extreme, most remote (from ex out of, Boeotian
es-; see ex-) + -ology. Originally in theology, the study of the four last things: death, judgment,
heaven, hell. Related: Eschatological; eschatologically.


harrow (v.)

to drag a harrow over, especially in harrowing of Hell in Christian theology, early 14c., from
hergian (see harry). In the figurative sense of to wound the feelings, distress greatly it is first
attested c.1600 in Shakespeare. Related: Harrowed; harrowing.


vincible (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French vincible and directly from Latin vincibilis that which can be gained;
easily maintained, from vincere (see victor). A vincible ignorance in theology is an ignorance in
one who possesses the means of overcoming it.


aspersion (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin aspersionem (nominative aspersio) a sprinkling, noun of action from past
participle stem of aspergere to sprinkle on, from ad- to (see ad-) + spargere sprinkle, strew (see
sparse). Originally in theology, the shedding of Christ's blood. Modern sense of a bespattering with
slander first attested 1590s. To cast aspersions was in Fielding (1749).


liberation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lib&#233;ration and directly from Latin liberationem (nominative
liberatio) a setting or becoming free, noun of action from past participle stem of liberare set free
(see liberate). Liberation theology (1969) translates Spanish teologia de la liberaci&oacute;n,
coined 1968 by Peruvian priest Gustavo Guti&eacute;rrez.


supererogation (n.)

1520s, performance of more than duty requires, in Catholic theology, from Late Latin
supererogationem (nominative supererogatio) a payment in addition, noun of action from past
participle stem of supererogare pay or do additionally, from Latin super above, over (see super-) +
erogare pay out, from ex- out (see ex-) + rogare ask, request (see rogation).


attrition (n.)

1540s, abrasion, a scraping, from Latin attritionem (nominative attritio), literally a rubbing
against, noun of action from past participle stem of atterere to wear, rub away, figuratively to
destroy, waste, from ad- to (see ad-) + terere to rub (see throw (v.)). The earliest sense in
English is from Scholastic theology (late 14c.), sorrow for sin merely out of fear of punishment, a
minor irritation, and thus less than contrition. The sense of wearing down of military strength is a
World War I coinage (1914). Figurative use by 1930.


material (adj.)

mid-14c., real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world; a term in scholastic philosophy
and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis
(adj.) of or belonging to matter, from Latin materia matter, stuff, wood, timber (see matter). From
late 14c. as made of matter, having material existence; material, physical, substantial; from late
15c. as important, relevant.


largesse (n.)

also largess, willingness to give or spend freely; munificence, c.1200, from Old French largesse a
bounty, munificence, from Vulgar Latin *largitia abundance, from Latin largus abundant (see large).
In medieval theology, the virtue whose opposite is avarice, and whose excess is prodigality [Middle
English Dictionary]. The Old French suffix -esse is from Latin -itia, added to adjectives to form
nouns of quality (compare duress, riches).


mediator (n.)

mid-14c., from Late Latin mediatorem (nominative mediator) one who mediates, agent noun from past
participle stem of mediari to intervene, mediate, also to be or divide in the middle, from Latin
medius in the middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally applied to Christ, who in Christian theology
mediates between God and man. Meaning one who intervenes between two disputing parties is first
attested late 14c. Feminine form mediatrix (originally of the Virgin Mary) from c.1400. Related:
Mediatorial; mediatory.


retribution (n.)

late 14c., repayment, from Old French retribution and directly from Latin retributionem (nominative
retributio) recompense, repayment, noun of action from past participle stem of retribuere hand back,
repay, from re- back (see re-) + tribuere to assign, allot (see tribute). Originally that which is
given in return for past good or evil; restricted modern use of evil given for evil done (1560s) is
from day of retribution (1520s), in Christian theology the time of divine reward or punishment.


scholastic (adj.)

1590s, of or pertaining to Scholastic theologians (Churchmen in the Middle Ages whose theology and
philosophy was based on Church Fathers and Aristotle), from Middle French scholastique (14c.), from
Latin scholasticus of a school, from Greek skholastikos enjoying leisure; devoting one's leisure to
learning, hence, as a noun, a scholar, also in a bad sense, a pedant; a simpleton, from skhola (see
school (n.1)). In English, meaning pertaining to schools or to school education is from 1640s. As a
noun from 1640s. Related: Scholastical (1530s in the relating to a school sense); scholastically.


receptionist (n.)

person hired to receive clients in an office, 1900, from reception + -ist.  Originally in
photography studios.    Let me not forget the receptionist -- generally and preferably, a woman of
refined and gentle manners, well informed and specially gifted in handling people of varied
dispositions. A woman especially who knows how to handle other women, and who can make herself
beloved by the children who may visit the studio. A woman, also, who in a thoroughly suave and
dignified way, knows just how to handle the young man of the period so that the photographer may be
glad to have his business. What a power the receptionist is when properly chosen and trained. It is
not too much to say that she can both make and destroy a business, if she has the amount of
discretionary power given to her in some galleries. [John A. Tennant, Business Methods Applied in
Photography, Wilson's Photographic Magazine, October 1900]    Earlier as an adjective in theology
and law (1867).


believe (v.)

Old English belyfan to believe, earlier geleafa (Mercian), gelefa (Northumbrian), gelyfan (West
Saxon) believe, from Proto-Germanic *ga-laubjan to believe, perhaps literally hold dear, love
(cognates: Old Saxon gilobian believe, Dutch geloven, Old High German gilouben, German glauben),
ultimately a compound based on PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love (see belief).    Spelling beleeve
is common till 17c.; then altered, perhaps by influence of relieve, etc. To believe on instead of in
was more common in 16c. but now is a peculiarity of theology; believe of also sometimes was used in
17c. Related: Believed (formerly occasionally beleft); believing. Expression believe it or not
attested by 1874; Robert Ripley's newspaper cartoon of the same name is from 1918. Emphatic you
better believe attested from 1854.


Q

16th letter of the classical Roman alphabet, from the Phoenician equivalent of Hebrew koph, qoph,
which was used for the more guttural of the two k sounds in Semitic.    The letter existed in Greek,
but was little used and not alphabetized; the stereotypical connection with -u- began in Latin.
Anglo-Saxon scribes adopted the habit at first, but later used spellings with cw- or cu-. The qu-
pattern returned to English with the Norman Conquest and had displaced cw- by c.1300. In some
spelling variants of late Middle English, quh- also took work from wh-, especially in Scottish and
northern dialects, for example Gavin Douglas, Provost of St. Giles, in his vernacular Aeneid of
1513:    Lyk as the rois in June with hir sueit smell  The marygulde or dasy doith excell.  Quhy
suld I than, with dull forhede and vane,  With ruide engine and barrand emptive brane,  With bad
harsk speche and lewit barbour tong,  Presume to write quhar thi sueit bell is rong,  Or contirfait
sa precious wourdis deir?    Scholars use -q- alone to transliterate Semitic koph (as in Quran,
Qatar, Iraq ). In Christian theology, Q has been used since 1901 to signify the hypothetical source
of passages shared by Matthew and Luke, but not in Mark; in this sense probably it is an
abbreviation of German Quelle source.


