thermal (adj.)

1756, having to do with hot springs, from French thermal (Buffon), from Greek therme heat, feverish
heat, from PIE *gwher- to heat, warm (cognates: Latin fornax an oven, kiln, formus warm, Old English
wearm; see warm (adj.)). Sense of having to do with heat is first recorded 1837. The noun meaning
rising current of relatively warm air is recorded from 1933.


hydrothermal (adj.)

1852, from hydro- + thermal (adj.); 1855 in geology.


hyperthermia (n.)

1878, medical Latin, from hyper- + Greek therme heat (see thermal).


endothermic (adj.)

1884, from French endothermique (1879); see endo- + thermal.


thermo-

before vowels therm-, word-forming element meaning hot, heat, temperature, used in scientific and
technical words, from comb. form of Greek thermos hot, warm, therme heat (see thermal).


geothermal (adj.)

1875, from geo- + thermal.


isotherm (n.)

1860, from French isotherme (Humboldt, 1817), from Greek iso- (see iso-) + therme heat (see
thermal).


hypothermia (n.)

1877, Modern Latin, from hypo- under (see hypo-) + Greek therme heat (see thermal).


Thermos (n.)

trademark registered in Britain 1907, invented by Sir James Dewar (patented 1904 but not named
then), from Greek thermos hot (see thermal). Dewar built the first one in 1892, but it was first
manufactured commercially in Germany in 1904, when two glass blowers formed Thermos GmbH. Supposedly
the company sponsored a contest to name the thing, and a Munich resident won with a submission of
Thermos.


exothermic (adj.)

1879, from French exothermique (1879), from exo- + thermique, ultimately from Greek therme heat (see
thermal).


Bourbon

line of French kings (who also ruled in Naples and Spain), of whom it was proverbially said, they
learn nothing and forget nothing. The royal family ruled in France 1589-1792 and 1815-1848; its name
is from Bourbon l'Archambault, chief town of a lordship in central France, probably from Borvo, name
of a local Celtic deity associated with thermal springs, whose name probably is related to Celtic
borvo foam, froth.


Thermopylae

narrow land passage along the Malian Gulf in ancient Greece, from Greek thermos hot (see thermal) +
pylai, plural of pyle gate; mountain pass, entrance into a region (see pylon). In reference to
nearby hot sulfur springs. Often simply hai pylai the gates. Figurative of heroic resistance against
overwhelming numbers since the battle fought there between the Greeks and Persians in 480 B.C.E.


thermometer (n.)

1630s, from French thermom&egrave;tre (1620s), coined by Jesuit Father Jean Leur&eacute;chon from
Greek thermos hot (see thermal) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)). An earlier, Latinate form was
thermoscopium (1610s). The earliest such device was Galileo's air-thermometer, invented c.1597. The
typical modern version, with mercury in glass, was invented by Fahrenheit in 1714. Related:
Thermometric; thermometrical.


th

A sound found chiefly in words of Old English, Old Norse or Greek origin, unpronounceable by Normans
and many other Europeans. In Greek, the sound corresponds etymologically to Sanskrit -dh- and
English -d-; and it was represented graphically by -TH- and at first pronounced as a true aspirate
(as still in English outhouse, shithead, etc.). But by 2c. B.C.E. the Greek letter theta was in
universal use and had the modern -th- sound. Latin had neither the letter nor the sound, however,
and the Romans represented Greek theta by -TH-, which they generally pronounced, at least in Late
Latin, as simple -t- (passed down to Romanic languages, as in Spanish termal thermal, teoria theory,
teatro theater).    In Germanic languages it represents PIE *-t- and was common at the start of
words or after stressed vowels. To represent it, Old English and Old Norse used the characters &eth;
eth (a modified form of -d-) and &thorn; thorn, which originally was a rune. Old English, unlike Old
Norse, seems never to have standardized which of the two versions of the sound (hard and soft) was
represented by which of the two letters.    The digraph -th- sometimes appears in early Old English,
on the Roman model, and it returned in Middle English with the French scribes, driving out eth by
c.1250, but thorn persisted, especially in demonstratives (&thorn;at, &thorn;e, &thorn;is, etc.),
even as other words were being spelled with -th-. The advent of printing dealt its death-blow,
however, as types were imported from continental founders, who had no thorn. For a time y was used
in its place (especially in Scotland), because it had a similar shape, hence ye for the in
historical tourist trap Ye Olde _______ Shoppe (it never was pronounced ye, only spelled that way).
The awareness that some Latin words in t- were from Greek th- encouraged over-correction in English
and created unetymological forms such as Thames and author, while some words borrowed from Romanic
languages preserve, on the Roman model, the Greek -th- spelling but the simple Latin t pronunciation
(as in Thomas and thyme).


