thesis (n.)

late 14c., unaccented syllable or note, from Latin thesis unaccented syllable in poetry, later (and
more correctly) stressed part of a metrical foot, from Greek thesis a proposition, also downbeat (in
music), originally a setting down, a placing, an arranging; position, situation, from root of
tithenai to place, put, set, from PIE root *dhe- to set, to put (see factitious). Sense in logic of
a formulation in advance of a proposition to be proved is first recorded 1570s; that of dissertation
presented by a candidate for a university degree is from 1650s.


hypothesis (n.)

1590s, from Middle French hypothese and directly from Late Latin hypothesis, from Greek hypothesis
base, basis of an argument, supposition, literally a placing under, from hypo- under (see sub-) +
thesis a placing, proposition (see thesis). A term in logic; narrower scientific sense is from
1640s.


prothesis (n.)

from Greek prothesis a placing before, a placing in public, from pro (see pro-) + thesis (see
thesis). In ecclesiastical sense from 1670s; grammatical from 1870. Related: Prothetic (1835 in
grammar); prothetical; prothetically.


technocracy (n.)

1919, coined by W.H. Smyth as a name for a new system of government by technical experts, from
techno- + -cracy.    William Henry Smyth, a distinguished engineer of Berkeley, California, wrote at
the close of the war a series of thoughtful papers for the New York magazine Industrial Management,
on the subject of Technocracy. His thesis was the need of a Supreme National Council of Scientists
to advise us how best to live, and how most efficiently to realize our individual aspirations and
our national purpose. [The Bookman, March 1922]


theme (n.)

early 14c., subject or topic on which a person writes or speaks, from Old French tesme (13c., with
silent -s- indicating vowel length [OED], Modern French th&#232;me) and directly from Latin thema a
subject, thesis, from Greek thema a proposition, subject, deposit, literally something set down,
from root of tithenai put down, place, from PIE *dhe-mn, from root *dhe- to put, to do (see
factitious). Meaning school essay is from 1540s. Extension to music first recorded 1670s; theme song
first attested 1929. Theme park is from 1960.


deed (n.)

Old English d&aelig;d a doing, act, action, transaction, event, from Proto-Germanic *d&aelig;dis
(cognates: Old Saxon dad, Old Norse da&eth;, Old Frisian dede, Middle Dutch daet, Dutch daad, Old
High German tat, German Tat deed, Gothic gade&thorn;s a putting, placing), from PIE *dhetis
(cognates: Lithuanian detis load, burden, Greek thesis a placing, setting), from *dhe- place, put
(see do). Sense of written legal document is early 14c. As a verb, 1806, American English Related:
Deeded; deeding.


