thrash (v.)

1580s, to separate grains from wheat, etc., by beating, dialectal variant of threshen (see thresh).
Sense of beat (someone) with (or as if with) a flail is first recorded 1620s. Meaning to make wild
movements like those of a flail or whip is attested from 1846. Related: Thrashed; thrashing. As a
noun from 1660s, threshing tool; 1840s as a beating; 1982 as the name for a type of fast heavy metal
music.


larrup (v.)

to beat, thrash, 1823, of unknown origin, possibly related to Dutch larpen to thrash. First
mentioned as a Suffolk dialect word.


belt (v.)

early 14c., to fasten or gird with a belt, from belt (n.). Meaning to thrash as with a belt is
1640s; general sense of to hit, thrash is attested from 1838. Colloquial meaning to sing or speak
vigorously is from 1949. Related: Belted; belting. Hence (from the thrash with a belt sense) the
noun meaning a blow or stroke (1899).


beat up (v.)

thrash, strike repeatedly, c.1900 (v.), from beat (v.). Beat-up as an adjectival phrase meaning
worn-out dates to 1946.


cream (v.)

mid-15c., to foam, from cream (n.). Meaning to beat, thrash, wreck is 1929, U.S. colloquial.
Related: Creamed; creaming.


knell (v.)

Old English cnyllan to toll a bell; strike, knock, cognate with Middle High German erknellen to
resound, Old Norse knylla to beat, thrash; probably imitative. Related: Knelled; knelling.


lambaste (v.)

1630s, from lam (1590s, ultimately from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse lemja to beat, to
lame) + baste to thrash (see baste). Related: Lambasted; lambasting.


trounce (v.)

1550s, to trouble, afflict, harass, later to beat, thrash (1560s), of uncertain origin. Perhaps
related to Middle French troncer to cut, cut off a piece from, from tronce piece of timber, from Old
French tronc (see trunk). Related: Trounced; trouncing.


pound (v.)

hit repeatedly, from Middle English pounen, from Old English punian crush, pulverize, beat, bruise,
from West Germanic *puno- (cognates: Low German pun, Dutch puin fragments). With intrusive -d- from
16c. Sense of beat, thrash is from 1790. Related: Pounded; pounding.


baste (v.3)

beat, thrash, 1530s, perhaps from the cookery sense of baste (v.2) or from some Scandinavian source
(such as Swedish basa to beat, flog, b&ouml;sta to thump) akin to Old Norse beysta to beat, and
related to Old English beatan (see beat (v.)).


frottage (n.)

1933, from French frottage rubbing, friction, from frotter to rub, from Old French froter to rub,
wipe; beat, thrash (12c.), from Latin fricare to rub (see friction). As a paraphilia, it is known as
frotteurism.


wallop (v.)

late 14c., to gallop, possibly from Old North French *waloper (13c., Old French galoper), from
Frankish compound *walalaupan to run well (compare Old High German wela well, see well (adv.); and
Old Low Franconian loupon to run, leap, from Proto-Germanic *hlaupan; see leap (v.)). The meaning to
thrash (1820) and the noun meaning heavy blow (1823) may be separate developments, of imitative
origin. Related: Walloped; walloping.


be-

word-forming element with a wide range of meaning: thoroughly, completely; to make, cause seem; to
provide with; at, on, to, for, from Old English be- on all sides (also used to make transitive verbs
and as a privative or intensive prefix), from weak form of Old English bi by, probably cognate with
second syllable of Greek amphi, Latin ambi and originally meaning about (see ambi-).    This sense
naturally drifted into intensive (as in bespatter spatter about, therefore spatter very much). Be-
can also be privative (as in behead), causative, or have just about any sense required. The prefix
was productive 16c.-17c. in forming useful words, many of which have not survived, such as bethwack
to thrash soundly (1550s), betongue to assail in speech, to scold (1630s).


work (v.)

a fusion of Old English wyrcan (past tense worhte, past participle geworht) prepare, perform, do,
make, construct, produce; strive after (from Proto-Germanic *wurkijan); and Old English wircan
(Mercian) to operate, function, set in motion, a secondary verb formed relatively late from Proto-
Germanic noun *werkan (see work (n.)). Sense of perform physical labor was in Old English, as was
sense ply one's trade and exert creative power, be a creator. Transitive sense manipulate (physical
substances) into a desired state or form was in Old English. Meaning have the expected or desired
effect is from late 14c. In Middle English also perform sexually (mid-13c.). Related: Worked (15c.);
working. To work up excite is from c.1600. To work over beat up, thrash is from 1927. To work
against attempt to subvert is from late 14c.


beat (v.)

Old English beatan inflict blows on, thrash (class VII strong verb; past tense beot, past participle
beaten), from Proto-Germanic *bautan (cognates: Old Norse bauta, Old High German bozan to beat),
from PIE root *bhau- to strike (see batter (v.)). Of the heart, c.1200, from notion of it striking
against the breast. Meaning to overcome in a contest is from 1610s (the source of the sense of
legally avoid, escape in beat the charges, etc., attested from c.1920 in underworld slang).    Past
tense beat is from c.1500, probably not from Old English but a shortening of Middle English beted.
Dead-beat (originally tired-out) preserves the old past participle. Meaning strike cover to rouse or
drive game (c.1400) is source of beat around the bush (1570s), the metaphoric sense of which has
shifted from make preliminary motions to avoid, evade. Command beat it go away first recorded 1906
(though action of feet upon the ground was a sense of Old English betan). To beat off masturbate is
recorded by 1960s. For beat generation see beatnik.


