thrall (n.)

late Old English &thorn;r&aelig;l bondman, serf, slave, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse
&thorn;r&aelig;ll slave, servant, figuratively wretch, scoundrel, probably from Proto-Germanic
*thrakhilaz, literally runner, from root *threh- to run (cognates: Old High German dregil servant,
properly runner; Old English &thorn;r&aelig;gan, Gothic &thorn;ragjan to run). Meaning condition of
servitude is from early 14c.


Orwellian (adj.)

1950 (first attested in Mary McCarthy), from English author George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair,
1903-1950), especially in reference to his novel Nineteen Eighty-Four. Ironically, it has come to be
used in reference to the totalitarian systems he satirized.It is as if George Orwell had conceived
the nightmare instead of analyzed it, helped to create it instead of helping to dispel its
euphemistic thrall. [Clive James]


thraldom (n.)

also thralldom, c.1200; see thrall + -dom.


enthrall (v.)

also enthral to hold in mental or moral bondage, 1570s, from en- (1) make, put in + thrall. Literal
sense is from 1610s. Related: Enthralled; enthralling.


slave (n.)

late 13c., person who is the chattel or property of another, from Old French esclave (13c.), from
Medieval Latin Sclavus slave (source also of Italian schiavo, French esclave, Spanish esclavo),
originally Slav (see Slav); so used in this secondary sense because of the many Slavs sold into
slavery by conquering peoples.  This sense development arose in the consequence of the wars waged by
Otto the Great and his successors against the Slavs, a great number of whom they took captive and
sold into slavery. [Klein]    Meaning one who has lost the power of resistance to some habit or vice
is from 1550s. Applied to devices from 1904, especially those which are controlled by others
(compare slave jib in sailing, similarly of locomotives, flash bulbs, amplifiers). Slave-driver is
attested from 1807; extended sense of cruel or exacting task-master is by 1854. Slate state in U.S.
history is from 1812. Slave-trade is attested from 1734.    Old English Wealh Briton also began to
be used in the sense of serf, slave c.850; and Sanskrit dasa-, which can mean slave, apparently is
connected to dasyu- pre-Aryan inhabitant of India. Grose's dictionary (1785) has under Negroe A
black-a-moor; figuratively used for a slave, without regard to race. More common Old English words
for slave were &thorn;eow (related to &thorn;eowian to serve) and &thorn;r&aelig;l (see thrall). The
Slavic words for slave (Russian rab, Serbo-Croatian rob, Old Church Slavonic rabu) are from Old
Slavic *orbu, from the PIE root *orbh- (also source of orphan), the ground sense of which seems to
be thing that changes allegiance (in the case of the slave, from himself to his master). The Slavic
word is also the source of robot.


