thresh (v.)

Old English &thorn;rescan, &thorn;erscan, to beat, sift grain by trampling or beating, from Proto-
Germanic *threskan to thresh, originally to tread, to stamp noisily (cognates: Middle Dutch
derschen, Dutch dorschen, Old High German dreskan, German dreschen, Old Norse &thorn;reskja, Swedish
tr&#246;ska, Gothic &thorn;riskan), from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)).    The
basic notion is of men or oxen treading out wheat; later, with the advent of the flail, the word
acquired its modern extended sense of to knock, beat, strike. The original Germanic sense is
suggested by the use of the word in Romanic languages that borrowed it, such as Italian trescare to
prance, Old French treschier to dance, Spanish triscar to stamp the feet.


thresher (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from thresh. The thresher shark (c.1600) so called for its long upper tail,
which resembles a threshing tool.


threshold (n.)

Old English &thorn;rescold, &thorn;&aelig;rscwold, &thorn;erxold, etc., door-sill, point of
entering, probably literally something to tread upon, with first element related to Old English
&thorn;rescan (see thresh), with its original sense of tread, trample. Second element of unknown
origin and much transformed in all the Germanic languages, suggesting its literal sense was lost
even in ancient times. In English it probably has been altered to conform to hold, but the oft-
repeated story that the threshold was a barrier placed at the doorway to hold the chaff flooring in
the room is mere folk etymology. Cognates include Old Norse &thorn;reskjoldr, Swedish tr&ouml;skel,
Old High German driscufli, German dialectal drischaufel. Figurative use was in Old English.


triticale (n.)

hybrid cereal grass, 1952, from Modern Latin Triti(cum) wheat (literally grain for threshing, from
tritus, past participle of terere to rub, thresh, grind) + (Se)cale rye.


thrash (v.)

1580s, to separate grains from wheat, etc., by beating, dialectal variant of threshen (see thresh).
Sense of beat (someone) with (or as if with) a flail is first recorded 1620s. Meaning to make wild
movements like those of a flail or whip is attested from 1846. Related: Thrashed; thrashing. As a
noun from 1660s, threshing tool; 1840s as a beating; 1982 as the name for a type of fast heavy metal
music.


lithotripsy (n.)

1834, from litho- + -tripsy, from Greek tripsis rubbing, from tribein to rub, thresh, pound, wear
out, from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)). Klein says the intended Greek
word is thryptein to crush and there has been confusion with tribein.


triturate (v.)

grind into powder, 1755, from Late Latin trituratus, past participle of triturare to thresh, to
grind, from Latin tritura a rubbing, a threshing, from past participle stem of terere to rub (see
throw (v.)). Related: Triturated; triturating.


tribulation (n.)

c.1200, from Old French tribulacion (12c.), from Church Latin tribulationem (nominative tribulatio)
distress, trouble, affliction, noun of action from past participle stem of tribulare to oppress,
afflict, a figurative use by Christian writers of Latin tribulare to press, also possibly to thresh
out grain, from tribulum threshing sledge, from stem of terere to rub (see throw (v.)) + -bulum,
suffix forming names of tools.


throw (v.)

to project, propel, c.1300, from Old English &thorn;rawan to twist, turn, writhe, curl, (past tense
&thorn;reow, past participle &thorn;rawen), from Proto-Germanic *threw- (cognates: Old Saxon
thraian, Middle Dutch dr&aelig;yen, Dutch draaien, Old High German draen, German drehen to turn,
twist; not found in Scandinavian or Gothic), from PIE *tere- (1) to rub, turn, rub by turning, bore
(cognates: Sanskrit turah wounded, hurt, Greek teirein to rub, rub away, Latin terere to rub,
thresh, grind, wear away, Old Church Slavonic tiro to rub, Lithuanian trinu to rub, Old Irish
tarathar borer, Welsh taraw to strike).    Not the usual Old English word for to throw (weorpan,
related to warp (v.) was common in this sense). The sense evolution may be via the notion of
whirling a missile before throwing it. The sense of put by force (as in throw in jail) is first
recorded 1550s; that of confuse, flabbergast is from 1844; that of lose deliberately is from 1868.
To throw the book at (someone) is 1932, from notion of judge sentencing a criminal from a law book
full of possible punishments. To throw (one's) hat in the ring issue a challenge, especially to
announce one's candidacy, first recorded 1917. To throw up vomit is first recorded 1732. To throw
(someone) off confuse by a false scent is from 1891.


