threaten (v.)

late 13c., attempt to influence by menacing, from Old English &thorn;reatnian to threaten (see
threat). Related: Threatened. Threatening in the sense of portending no good is recorded from 1520s.


threat (n.)

Old English &thorn;reat crowd, troop, also oppression, coercion, menace, related to &thorn;reotan to
trouble, weary, from Proto-Germanic *thrautam (cognates: Dutch verdreiten, German verdrie&szlig;en
to vex), from PIE *treud- to push, press squeeze (cognates: Latin trudere to press, thrust, Old
Church Slavonic trudu oppression, Middle Irish trott quarrel, conflict, Middle Welsh cythrud
torture, torment, afflict). Sense of conditional declaration of hostile intention was in Old
English.


menace (n.)

c.1300, declaration of hostile intent, also act of threatening, from Old French menace menace,
threat (9c.), from Vulgar Latin minacia threat, menace (also source of Spanish amenaza, Italian
minaccia), singular of Latin minaci&aelig; threatening things, from minax (genitive minacis)
threatening, from minari threaten, jut, project, from min&aelig; threats, projecting points, from
PIE root *men- (2) to project. Applied to persons from 1936.


throe (n.)

c.1200, throwe pain, pang of childbirth, agony of death, of uncertain origin, possibly from Old
English &thorn;rawan twist, turn, writhe (see throw (v.)), or altered from Old English &thorn;rea
(genitive &thorn;rawe) affliction, pang, evil; threat, persecution (related to &thorn;rowian to
suffer), from Proto-Germanic *thrawo (cognates: Middle High German dro threat, German drohen to
threaten). Modern spelling first recorded 1610s. Related: Throes.


ban (v.)

Old English bannan to summon, command, proclaim, from Proto-Germanic *bannan proclaim, command,
forbid (cognates: Old High German bannan to command or forbid under threat of punishment, German
bannen banish, expel, curse), originally to speak publicly, from PIE root *bha- (2) to speak
(cognates: Old Irish bann law, Armenian ban word; see fame (n.)).     Main modern sense of to
prohibit (late 14c.) is from Old Norse cognate banna to curse, prohibit, and probably in part from
Old French ban, which meant outlawry, banishment, among other things (see banal) and was a borrowing
from Germanic. The sense evolution in Germanic was from speak to proclaim a threat to (in Norse,
German, etc.) curse.    The Germanic root, borrowed in Latin and French, has been productive:
banish, bandit, contraband, etc. Related: Banned; banning. Banned in Boston dates from 1920s, in
allusion to the excessive zeal and power of that city's Watch and Ward Society.


minatory (adj.)

expressing a threat, 1530s, from Middle French minatoire, from Late Latin minatorius, from minat-,
stem of minari to threaten (see menace (n.)).


ofay (n.)

American English black slang, white person, 1925, of unknown origin. If, as is sometimes claimed, it
derives from an African word, none corresponding to it has been found. Perhaps the most plausible
speculation is Yoruba &oacute;f&eacute; to disappear (as from a powerful enemy), with the sense
transferred from the word of self-protection to the source of the threat. OED regards the main
alternative theory, that it is pig Latin for foe, to be no more than an implausible guess.


thrust (v.)

late 12c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse &thorn;rysta to thrust, force, press, from
Proto-Germanic *thrustijanan, perhaps from PIE *treud- push, press (see threat), but OED finds this
derivation doubtful. Related: Thrusting.


extrusion (n.)

1530s, from Latin extrusionem (nominative extrusio), noun of action from past participle stem of
extrudere, from ex- out (see ex-) + trudere to thrust, push, from PIE *treud- to press, push,
squeeze (see threat).


muscle (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French muscle muscle, sinew (14c.) and directly from Latin musculus a muscle,
literally little mouse, diminutive of mus mouse (see mouse (n.)).    So called because the shape and
movement of some muscles (notably biceps) were thought to resemble mice. The analogy was made in
Greek, too, where mys is both mouse and muscle, and its comb. form gives the medical prefix myo-.
Compare also Old Church Slavonic mysi mouse, mysica arm; German Maus mouse; muscle, Arabic 'adalah
muscle, 'adal field mouse. In Middle English, lacerte, from the Latin word for lizard, also was used
as a word for a muscle.    Musclez &amp; lacertez bene one selfe &thorn;ing, Bot &thorn;e muscle is
said to &thorn;e fourme of mouse &amp; lacert to &thorn;e fourme of a lizard. [Guy de Chauliac,
Grande Chirurgie, c.1425]    Hence muscular and mousy are relatives, and a Middle English word for
muscular was lacertous, lizardy. Figurative sense of force, violence, threat of violence is 1930,
American English. Muscle car hot rod is from 1969.


money (n.)

mid-13c., coinage, metal currency, from Old French monoie money, coin, currency; change (Modern
French monnaie), from Latin moneta place for coining money, mint; coined money, money, coinage, from
Moneta, a title or surname of the Roman goddess Juno, in or near whose temple money was coined;
perhaps from monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)), with the sense of admonishing goddess, which is
sensible, but the etymology is difficult. Extended early 19c. to include paper money.    It had been
justly stated by a British writer that the power to make a small piece of paper, not worth one cent,
by the inscribing of a few names, to be worth a thousand dollars, was a power too high to be
entrusted to the hands of mortal man. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. Senate, Dec. 29, 1841]   <hr />
I am not interested in money but in the things of which money is the symbol. [Henry Ford]  To make
money earn pay is first attested mid-15c. Highwayman's threat your money or your life first attested
1841. Phrase in the money (1902) originally meant one who finishes among the prize-winners (in a
horse race, etc.). The challenge to put (one's) money where (one's) mouth is is first recorded 1942,
American English. money-grub one who is sordidly intent on amassing money is from 1768. The image of
money burning a hole in someone's pocket is attested from 1520s.


bug (n.)

insect, 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably but not certainly from
or influenced by Middle English bugge something frightening, scarecrow (late 14c.), a meaning
obsolete since the insect sense arose except in bugbear (1570s) and bugaboo (q.v.).    Probably
connected with Scottish bogill goblin, bugbear, or obsolete Welsh bwg ghost, goblin (compare Welsh
bwgwl threat, earlier fear, Middle Irish bocan&#225;ch supernatural being). Some speculate that
these words are from a root meaning goat (see buck (n.1)) and represent originally a goat-like
spectre. Compare also bogey (n.1) and German b&ouml;gge, b&ouml;ggel-mann goblin. Perhaps influenced
in meaning by Old English -budda used in compounds for beetle (compare Low German budde louse, grub,
Middle Low German buddech thick, swollen).     In the United States bug is not confined, as in
England, to the domestic pest, but is applied to all insects of the Coleoptera order, which includes
what in this country are generally called beetles. [Farmer &amp; Henley, Dictionary of Slang and
Colloquial English, 1912 abridged edition]    Meaning defect in a machine (1889) may have been
coined c.1878 by Thomas Edison (perhaps with the notion of an insect getting into the works).
Meaning person obsessed by an idea (such as firebug) is from 1841, perhaps from notion of
persistence. Sense of microbe, germ is from 1919. Bugs crazy is from c.1900. Bug juice as a slang
name for drink is from 1869, originally bad whiskey. The 1811 slang dictionary has bug-hunter an
upholsterer. Bug-word word or words meant to irritate and vex is from 1560s.


