thrive (v.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse &thorn;rifask to thrive, originally grasp to
oneself, probably reflexive of &thorn;rifa to clutch, grasp, grip, take hold of (compare Norwegian
triva to seize, Swedish trifvas, Danish trives to thrive, flourish), of unknown origin. Related:
Thrived (or throve); thriving.


thrift (n.)

c.1300, fact or condition of thriving, also prosperity, savings, from Middle English thriven to
thrive (see thrive), influenced by (or from) Old Norse &thorn;rift, variant of &thorn;rif
prosperity, from &thorn;rifask to thrive. Sense of habit of saving, economy first recorded 1550s
(thrifty in this sense is recorded from 1520s; also see spendthrift). Thrift shop attested by 1919.


throve

sometime past tense of thrive (v.).


flower (v.)

c.1200, be vigorous, prosper, thrive, from flower (n.). Of a plant or bud, to blossom, c.1300.
Related: Flowered; flowering.


choreographer (n.)

1829, from choreography + -er (1). Choreographist (1857) did not thrive. In Greek, a person who
trained a chorus was a khorodidaskelikos.


-trophy

word-forming element meaning food, nourishment, from Greek -trophia, from trophe food, nourishment,
related to trephein make thrive, nourish, rear; to make solid, congeal, thicken.


sperate (adj.)

of debts, having some likelihood of recovery, 1550s, from Latin speratus, past participle of sperare
to hope, denominative of spes hope, from PIE *spe-is-, from root spe- (1) to thrive, prosper (see
speed (n.)).


convalesce (v.)

late 15c., from Latin convalescere thrive, regain health, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
valescere to begin to grow strong, inchoative of valere to be strong (see valiant). Only in Caxton
and Scottish writers until 19c. Related: Convalesced; convalescing.


Terpsichore (n.)

the muse of the dance, Greek Terpsikhore, literally enjoyment of dance, from terpein to delight
(from PIE root *terp- to satisfy; cognates: Sanskrit trpyati takes one's fill, Lithuanian tarpstu to
thrive, prosper) + khoros dance, chorus (see chorus).


vigorous (adj.)

c.1300 (early 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French vigrus, Old French vigoros strong, robust,
powerful (12c., Modern French vigoreux), from Medieval Latin vigorosus, from Latin vigere be lively,
flourish, thrive (see vigor). Related: Vigorously.


cru (n.)

from French cru vineyard, literally growth (16c.), from Old French crois (12c.; Modern French
cro&icirc;t), from croiss-, stem of croistre growth, augment, increase, ultimately from Latin
crescere come forth, spring up, grow, thrive (see crescent).


prosper (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French prosperer (14c.) and directly from Latin prosperare cause to succeed,
render happy, from prosperus favorable, fortunate, prosperous, perhaps literally agreeable to one's
wishes, traditionally regarded as from Old Latin pro spere according to expectation, according to
one's hope, from pro for + ablative of spes hope, from PIE root *spe- to flourish, succeed, thrive,
prosper (see speed (n.)).


flourish (v.)

c.1300, to blossom, grow, from Old French floriss-, stem of florir blossom, flower, bloom, flourish,
from Latin florere to bloom, blossom, flower, figuratively to flourish, be prosperous, from flos a
flower (see flora).    Metaphoric sense of thrive is mid-14c. Meaning to brandish (a weapon) first
attested late 14c. Related: Flourished; flourishing.


Phyllis

fem. proper name, generic proper name for a comely rustic maiden in pastoral poetry (1630s), from
Latin Phyllis, a girl's name in Virgil, Horace, etc., from Greek Phyllis, female name, literally
foliage of a tree, from phyllon leaf, from PIE *bholyo- leaf, from root *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). In English, often spelled
Phillis, probably from influence of phil- loving. Her sweetheart usually was Philander.


blossom (n.)

c.1200, from Old English blostm, blostma blossom, flower, fruit, from Proto-Germanic *blo-s-
(cognates: Middle Low German blosom, Dutch bloesem, German Blust), from PIE *bhlow-, extended form
of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see
bole). This is the native word, now largely superseded by bloom and flower.


drift (n.)

c.1300, literally a being driven (of snow, etc.); not recorded in Old English; either a suffixed
form of drive (v.) (compare thrift/thrive) or borrowed from Old Norse drift snow drift, or Middle
Dutch drift pasturage, drove, flock, both from Proto-Germanic *driftiz (cognates: Danish and Swedish
drift, German Trift), from PIE root *dhreibh- to drive, push (see drive (v.)). Sense of what one is
getting at is from 1520s. Meaning controlled slide of a sports car attested by 1955.


vigor (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, energy in an activity, from Anglo-French vigour, Old French vigor force,
strength (Modern French vigueur), from Latin vigorem (nominative vigor) liveliness, activity, force,
from vigere be lively, flourish, thrive, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or active (see wake
(v.)).


flora (n.)

1777, the plant life of a region or epoch, from Latin Flora, Roman goddess of flowers, from flos
(genitive floris) flower, from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- to blossom, flourish
(cognates: Middle Irish blath, Welsh blawd blossom, flower, Old English blowan to flower, bloom),
extended form of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Used as the title of descriptive plant catalogues since 1640s, but popularized by Linnaeus in
his 1745 study of Swedish plants, Flora Suecica.


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


blade (n.)

Old English bl&aelig;d a leaf, but also a leaf-like part (of spade, oar, etc.), from Proto-Germanic
*bladaz (cognates: Old Frisian bled leaf, German blatt, Old Saxon, Danish, Dutch blad, Old Norse
bla&eth;), from PIE *bhle-to-, suffixed form (past participle) of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see bole). Extended in Middle English to
shoulders (c.1300) and swords (early 14c.). The modern use in reference to grass may be a Middle
English revival, by influence of Old French bled corn, wheat (11c., perhaps from Germanic). The
cognate in German, Blatt, is the general word for leaf; Laub is used collectively as foliage. Old
Norse bla&eth; was used of herbs and plants, lauf in reference to trees. This might have been the
original distinction in Old English, too. Of men from 1590s; in later use often a reference to 18c.
gallants, but the original exact sense, and thus signification, is uncertain.


crescent (n.)

late 14c., crescent-shaped ornament, from Anglo-French cressaunt, from Old French creissant crescent
of the moon (12c., Modern French croissant), from Latin crescentum (nominative crescens), present
participle of crescere come forth, spring up, grow, thrive, swell, increase in numbers or strength,
from PIE root *ker- (3) to grow (cognates: Latin Ceres, goddess of agriculture, creare to bring
forth, create, produce; Greek kouros boy, kore girl; Armenian serem bring forth, serim be born).
Applied in Latin to the waxing moon, luna crescens, but subsequently in Latin mistaken to refer to
the shape, not the stage. The original Latin sense is preserved in crescendo. A badge or emblem of
the Turkish sultans (probably chosen for its suggestion of increase); figurative sense of Muslim
political power is from 1580s, but modern writers often falsely associate it with the Saracens of
the Crusades or the Moors of Spain. Horns of the waxing moon are on the viewer's left side; those of
the waning moon are on his right.


speed (n.)

Old English sped success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck; opportunity,
advancement, from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (cognates: Old Saxon spod success, Dutch spoed haste,
speed, Old High German spuot success, Old Saxon spodian to cause to succeed, Middle Dutch spoeden,
Old High German spuoten to haste), from PIE *spo-ti-, from root *spe- (1) to thrive, prosper
(cognates: Sanskrit sphayate increases, Latin sperare to hope, Old Church Slavonic spechu endeavor,
Lithuanian speju to have leisure).    Meaning rapidity of movement, quickness, swiftness emerged in
late Old English (at first usually adverbially, in dative plural, as in spedum feran). Meaning rate
of motion or progress (whether fast or slow) is from c.1200. Meaning gear of a machine is attested
from 1866. Meaning methamphetamine, or a related drug, first attested 1967, from its effect on
users.   Speed limit is from 1879 (originally of locomotives); speed-trap is from 1908. Speed bump
is 1975; figurative sense is 1990s. Full speed is recorded from late 14c. Speed reading first
attested 1965. Speedball mix of cocaine and morphine or heroin is recorded from 1909.


