throttle (n.)

1540s, throat; it appears to be an independent formation from throat, perhaps a diminutive form, not
derived directly from the verb. The mechanical sense is first recorded 1872, short for throttle-
valve (1824). Full-throttle (allowing maximum speed) is from 1848 in reference to steam engines.


throttle (v.)

strangle to death, c.1400, probably from Middle English throte throat (see throat) + -le, perhaps a
frequentive suffix (as in spark/sparkle), or a utensil suffix (as in handle), or simply to
distinguish it from throat (v.), which in late 14c. was used to mean cut the throat of, kill by
cutting the throat. Related: Throttled; throttling.


anguish (n.)

c.1200, acute bodily or mental suffering, from Old French anguisse, angoisse choking sensation,
distress, anxiety, rage, from Latin angustia (plural angustiae) tightness, straitness, narrowness;
figuratively distress, difficulty, from ang(u)ere to throttle, torment (see anger (v.)).


balls (n.)

testicles, early 14c., from plural of ball (n.1). See also ballocks. Meaning courage, nerve is from
1928. Balls to the wall, however, probably is from World War II Air Forces slang, from the ball that
topped the aircraft throttle, thrust to the bulkhead of the cockpit to attain full speed. Ball-
busting difficult is first recorded 1944; ball-buster, disparaging for dominant female, is from
1974.


suffocation (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French suffocation, from Latin suffocationem (nominative suffocatio) a
choking, stifling, noun of action from past participle stem of suffocare suffocate, throttle,
stifle, strangle, originally to narrow up, from sub up (from under) (see sub-) + fauces (plural)
throat, narrow entrance (see faucet).


angina (n.)

1570s, from Latin angina infection of the throat, from Greek ankhone a strangling (see anger);
probably influenced in Latin by angere to throttle. Angina pectoris is from 1744, from Latin
pectoris, genitive of pectus chest (see pectoral (adj.)).


strangle (v.)

late 13c., from Old French estrangler choke, suffocate, throttle (Modern French &#233;trangler),
from Latin strangulare to choke, stifle, check, constrain, from Greek strangalan to choke, twist,
from strangale a halter, cord, lace, related to strangos twisted, from PIE root *strenk- tight,
narrow; pull tight, twist (see string (n.)). Related: Strangled; strangling.


anger (v.)

c.1200, to irritate, annoy, provoke, from Old Norse angra to grieve, vex, distress; to be vexed at,
take offense with, from Proto-Germanic *angus (cognates: Old English enge narrow, painful, Middle
Dutch enghe, Gothic aggwus narrow), from PIE root *angh- tight, painfully constricted, painful
(cognates: Sanskrit amhu- narrow, amhah anguish; Armenian anjuk narrow; Lithuanian ankstas narrow;
Greek ankhein to squeeze, ankhone a strangling; Latin angere to throttle, torment; Old Irish cum-ang
straitness, want). In Middle English, also of physical pain. Meaning excite to wrath, make angry is
from late 14c. Related: Angered; angering.


buzz (n.)

a busy rumour [Rowe], 1620s (earlier a fancy, c.1600), figurative use from buzz (v.). Literal sense
of humming sound is from 1640s. A buzz was the characteristic sound of an airplane in early 20c.;
hence verbal sense to fly swiftly, by 1928; by 1940 especially in military use, to fly low over a
surface as a warning signal (for example that target practice is about to begin):    The patrol
aircraft shall employ the method of warning known as buzzing which consists of low flight by the
airplane and repeated opening and closing of the throttle. [1941 Supplement to the Code of Federal
Regulations of the United States of America, Chap. II, Corps of Engineers, War Department, p. 3434,
etc. ]    Meaning pleasant sense of intoxication first recorded 1935. The children's game of
counting off with 7 or multiples of it replaced by buzz is attested from 1864 and is mentioned in
Little Women (1868). To give (someone) a buzz (by 1922) is from the buzz that announced a call on
old telephone systems.


