throb (v.)

late 14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps meant to represent in sound the pulsation of arteries and
veins or the heart. Related: Throbbed; throbbing. The noun is first attested 1570s.


heart-throb (n.)

also heartthrob, 1839, from heart (n.) + throb (n.). Of persons who inspire romantic feelings, from
1928.


pulse (v.)

to beat, throb, early 15c., from pulse (n.1) or else from Latin pulsare to beat, throb, and in part
from French. Related: Pulsed; pulsing.


sphygmo-

word-forming element meaning pulse, from comb. form of Greek sphygmos a pulse, from sphyzein to
throb, pulse, beat.


athrob (adj.)

1857, from a- (1) + throb. Related: Athrobbing.


palpitate (v.)

1620s, from Latin palpitatus, past participle of palpitare to throb, flutter (see palpitation).
Related: Palpitated; palpitating.


palpitant (adj.)

1837, from French palpitant (early 16c.), from Latin palpitantem, present participle of palpitare to
move frequently and swiftly, tremble, throb, frequentative of palpare to touch (see feel (v.)).


palpitation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French palpitation, from Latin palpitationem (nominative palpitatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of palpitare to throb, to flutter, to tremble, to quiver,
frequentative of palpare touch gently, stroke; wheedle, coax (see feel (v.)).


asphyxia (n.)

1706, stoppage of pulse, absence of pulse, from Modern Latin, from Greek asphyxia stopping of the
pulse, from a- not (see a- (3)) + sphyzein to throb. Obsolete in its original sense; the transferred
sense of suffocation is from 1778, but it is a curious infelicity of etymology [OED] because victims
of suffocation have a pulse for some time after breathing has stopped.


pulse (n.1)

a throb, a beat, early 14c., from Old French pous, pulse (late 12c., Modern French pouls) and
directly from Latin pulsus (in pulsus venarum beating from the blood in the veins), past participle
of pellere to push, drive, from PIE *pel- (6) to thrust, strike, drive (cognates: Greek pallein to
wield, brandish, swing, pelemizein to shake, cause to tremble). Extended usages from 16c. Figurative
use for life, vitality, essential energy is from 1530s.


clap (v.)

Old English cl&aelig;ppan to throb, beat, common Germanic, echoic (cognate with Old Frisian klapa to
beat, Old Norse klappa, Old High German klaphon, German klappen, Old Saxon klapunga). Meaning to
strike or knock is from c.1300. Meaning to make a sharp noise is late 14c. Of hands, to beat them
together to get attention or express joy, from late 14c. To clap (someone) on the back is from
1520s. Related: Clapped; clapping.


beat (n.)

c.1300, a beating, whipping; the beating of a drum, from beat (v.). As throb of the heart from 1755.
Meaning regular route travelled by someone is attested from 1731, also a track made by animals
(1736), from the sense of the beat of the feet on the ground (late Old English), or perhaps that in
beat the bushes to flush game (c.1400), or beat the bounds (1560s). Extended to journalism by 1875.
Musical sense is by 1842, perhaps from the motion of the conductor and the notion of beating the
time:    It is usual, in beating the time of a piece of music, to mark or signalize the commencement
of every measure by a downward movement or beat of the hand, or of any other article that may be
used for the purpose .... [Godfrey Weber's General Music Teacher, 1842]    Earlier in music it meant
a sort of grace note:    BEAT, in music, a transient grace note, struck immediately before the note
it is intended to ornament. The beat always lies half a note beneath its principal, and should be
heard so closely upon it, that they may almost seem to be struck together. [The British
Encyclopedia, London, 1809]


