throng (v.)

go in a crowd, 1530s, from throng (n.). Earlier it meant to press, crush (c.1400). Related:
Thronged; thronging.


throng (n.)

c.1300, probably shortened from Old English ge&thorn;rang crowd, tumult (related to verb
&thorn;ringan to push, crowd, press), from Proto-Germanic *thrangan (cognates: Old Norse
&thorn;r&ouml;ng, Dutch drang, German Drang crowd, throng).


vulgar (adj.)

late 14c., common, ordinary, from Latin vulgaris, volgaris of or pertaining to the common people,
common, vulgar, low, mean, from vulgus the common people, multitude, crowd, throng, perhaps from a
PIE root *wel- to crowd, throng (cognates: Sanskrit vargah division, group, Greek eilein to press,
throng, Middle Breton gwal'ch abundance, Welsh gwala sufficiency, enough) [not in Watkins]. Meaning
coarse, low, ill-bred is first recorded 1640s, probably from earlier use (with reference to people)
with meaning belonging to the ordinary class (1530). Related: Vulgarly.


press (n.)

c.1300, presse, crowd, throng, company; crowding and jostling of a throng; a massing together, from
Old French presse (n.) throng, crush, crowd; wine or cheese press (11c.), from Latin pressare (see
press (v.1)). Late Old English had press clothes press.    Meaning device for pressing cloth is from
late 14c., as is also the sense device to squeeze juice from grapes, oil from olives, cider from
apples, etc., from Middle French presse. Specific sense machine for printing is from 1530s; this was
extended to publishing houses by 1570s and to publishing generally (in phrases like freedom of the
press) from c.1680. This gradually shifted c.1800-1820 to periodical publishing, journalism. The
press, meaning journalists collectively is attested from 1921 (though superseded by media since the
rise of television, etc.).   Press agent is from 1873; press conference is attested from 1931,
though the thing itself dates to at least World War I. Press secretary is recorded from 1940. Via
the sense crowd, throng, Middle English in press meant in public, a coincidental parallel to the
modern phrase in the press. Weightlifting sense is from 1908. The basketball defense so called from
1959 (in full-court press).


scrum (n.)

1888, abbreviation of scrummage, a variant form of scrimmage (n.). Transferred sense of noisy throng
is from 1950.


Sturm und Drang (n.)

1844, literally storm and stress, late 18c. German romanticism period, taken from the title of a
1776 romantic drama by Friedrich Maximilian von Klinger (1752-1831), who gave it this name at the
suggestion of Christoph Kauffmann. See storm (n.) + throng (n.).


globe (n.)

mid-15c., sphere, from Middle French globe (14c.) and directly from Latin globus round mass, sphere,
ball, also, of men, a throng, crowd, body, mass, related to gleba clod, soil, land (see glebe).
Sense of planet earth, or a three-dimensional map of it first attested 1550s.


swarm (v.2)

to leave a hive to start another, also to gather in a swarm, crowd, or throng, late 14c., from swarm
(n.). Compare Dutch zwermen, German schw&#228;rmen, Danish sv&#230;rme. Related: Swarmed; swarming.


Boanerges

name given by Christ to John and James, the two sons of Zebedee (Mark iii:17), from Galilean
dialectal corruption of Hebrew bene reghesh sons of rage (interpreted in Greek as sons of thunder),
from bene (see B'nai B'rith) + reghesh commotion, tumult, throng. Applied figuratively to zealous or
loud preachers.


military (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French militaire (14c.), from Latin militaris of soldiers or war, of military
service, warlike, from miles (genitive militis) soldier, of unknown origin, perhaps ultimately from
Etruscan, or else meaning one who marches in a troop, and thus connected to Sanskrit melah assembly,
Greek homilos assembled crowd, throng. Related: Militarily. Old English had militisc, from Latin.
Military-industrial complex coined 1961 in farewell speech of U.S. president Dwight D. Eisenhower.


swarm (n.)

cloud of bees or other insects, Old English swearm swarm, multitude, from Proto-Germanic *swarmaz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Middle Low German swarm, Danish sv&#230;rm a swarm, Swedish sv&auml;rm, Middle
Dutch swerm, Old High German swaram, German Schwarm swarm; Old Norse svarmr tumult), by Watkins,
etc., derived from PIE imitative root *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (see susurration) on notion of
humming sound, and thus probably originally of bees. But OED suggests possible connection with base
of swerve and ground sense of agitated, confused, or deflected motion. General sense large, dense
throng is from early 15c.


people (n.)

late 13c., humans, persons in general, from Anglo-French people, Old French peupel people,
population, crowd; mankind, humanity, from Latin populus a people, nation; body of citizens; a
multitude, crowd, throng, of unknown origin, possibly from Etruscan. The Latin word also is the
source of Spanish pueblo, Italian popolo. In English, it displaced native folk.     Meaning body of
persons comprising a community first recorded late 13c. in Anglo-French; meaning common people,
masses (as distinguished from the nobility) first recorded c.1300 in Anglo-French. Meaning one's own
tribe, group, etc. is from late 14c. The word was adopted after c.1920 by Communist totalitarian
states to give a spurious sense of populism to their governments. Legal phrase The People vs., in
U.S. cases of prosecution under certain laws, dates from 1801. People of the Book those whose
religion entails adherence to a book of divine revelation (1834) translates Arabic Ahl al-Kitab.


