thwart (v.)

oppose, hinder, mid-13c., from thwart (adv.). Related: Thwarted; thwarting.


thwart (adv.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source, probably Old Norse &thorn;vert across, originally neuter of
thverr (adj.) transverse, across, cognate with Old English &thorn;weorh transverse, perverse, angry,
cross, from Proto-Germanic *thwerh- twisted, oblique (cognates: Middle Dutch dwers, Dutch dwars
cross-grained, contrary, Old High German twerh, German quer, Gothic &thorn;wairhs angry), altered
(by influence of *thwer- to turn) from *therkh-, from PIE *terkw- to twist (cognates: Latin torquere
to twist, Sanskrit tarkuh spindle, Old Church Slavonic traku band, girdle, Old High German drahsil
turner, German drechseln to turn on a lathe), possibly a variant of *twerk- to cut. From mid-13c. as
an adjective.


athwart (adv.)

late 15c., from a- (1) + thwart.


stymie (v.)

1857, in golf, from stymie (n.) condition in which an opponent's ball blocks the hole (1834),
perhaps from Scottish stymie person who sees poorly, from stime the least bit (early 14c.), of
uncertain origin. General sense of block, hinder, thwart is from 1902. Related: Stymied.


encumber (v.)

early 14c., burden, vex, inconvenience, from Old French encombrer to block up, hinder, thwart, from
Late Latin incombrare, from in- in (see in- (2)) + combrus barricade, obstacle, probably from Latin
cumulus heap. Meaning hinder, hamper is attested in English from late 14c. Related: Encumbered;
encumbering.


queer (adj.)

c.1500, strange, peculiar, eccentric, from Scottish, perhaps from Low German (Brunswick dialect)
queer oblique, off-center, related to German quer oblique, perverse, odd, from Old High German twerh
oblique, from PIE root *terkw- to turn, twist, wind (see thwart (adv.)).    Sense of homosexual
first recorded 1922; the noun in this sense is 1935, from the adjective. Related: Queerly. Queer
studies as an academic discipline attested from 1994.


torque (n.)

rotating force, 1882, from Latin torquere to twist, turn, turn about, twist awry, distort, torture,
from PIE *torkw-eyo-, causative of *terkw- to twist (see thwart (adv.)). The word also is used
(since 1834) by antiquarians and others as a term for the twisted metal necklace worn anciently by
Gauls, Britons, Germans, etc., from Latin torques collar of twisted metal, from torquere. Earlier it
had been called in English torques (1690s). Torque-wrench is from 1941.


prophylactic (adj.)

1570s, originally of medicines, that tends to prevent disease, from Middle French prophylactique
(16c.) and directly as a Latinized borrowing of Greek prophylaktikos precautionary, from
prophylassein keep guard before, ward off, be on one's guard, from pro- before (see pro-) +
phylassein, Ionic variant of phylattein to watch over, to guard, but also cherish, keep, remain in,
preserve (see phylactery).    The noun is first recorded 1640s, a medicine or treatment to prevent
disease; meaning condom is from 1943, replacing earlier preventive (1822), preventative (1901).
Condoms originally were used more to thwart contagious disease than to prevent pregnancy.


obstacle (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French obstacle, ostacle opposition, obstruction, hindrance (13c.) or directly
from Latin obstaculum a hindrance, obstacle, with instrumental suffix *-tlom + obstare stand before,
stand opposite to, block, hinder, thwart, from ob against (see ob-) + stare to stand, from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet).  The lover thinks more often of reaching his mistress than the husband of
guarding his wife; the prisoner thinks more often of escaping than the gaoler of shutting his door;
and so, whatever the obstacles may be, the lover and the prisoner ought to succeed. [Stendhal,
Charterhouse of Parma]Obstacle course is attested from 1891.


