tickle (v.)

early 14c. (intransitive) to be thrilled or tingling, of uncertain origin, possibly a frequentative
form of tick (v.) in its older sense of to touch. The Old English form was tinclian. Some suggest a
metathesis of kittle (Middle English kytyllen), from Dutch kietelen, from a common North Sea
Germanic word for to tickle (compare Old Norse kitla, Old High German kizzilon, German kitzeln).
Meaning to excite agreeably (late 14c.) is a translation of Latin titillare. Meaning to touch
lightly so as to cause a peculiar and uneasy sensation in the nerves is recorded from late 14c.;
that of to poke or touch so as to excite laughter is from early 15c.; figurative sense of to excite,
amuse is attested from 1680s. Related: Tickled; tickling. The noun is recorded from 1801. To tickle
(one's) fancy is from 1640s.


tickled (adj.)

pleased, happy, 1580s, past participle adjective from tickle (v.). To be tickled pink is from 1909.


titillation (n.)

early 15c., pleasing excitement, from Latin titillationem (nominative titillatio) a tickling, noun
of action from past participle stem of titillare to tickle, imitative of giggling.


ticklish (adj.)

easily tickled, 1590s, from tickle + -ish. Literal sense is attested later than the figurative sense
easy to upset (1580s). An earlier word for this was tickly (1520s). Meaning difficult to do,
dubious, requiring great care is from 1590s. Related: Ticklishly; ticklishness.


rickey (n.)

alcoholic drink made with carbonated water and lime juice, 1895; reputedly from the name of Colonel
Joseph K. Rickey (1842-1903), Democrat, of Callaway County, Missouri, U.S., lobbyist and wire-
puller, who is said to have concocted it to entertain political friends.    And as long as there is
thirst and limes, or lemons and gin, so long will the Honorable Joe Rickey be remembered in Missouri
and his famous beverage tickle the palates of discriminating citizens. A hundred summers hence Joe
Rickey will be called and Champ Clark and DeArmond forgotten. [The Conservative, Nebraska City,
Neb., July 6, 1899.]


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


midriff (n.)

Old English midhrif, from mid mid (see mid) + hrif belly, from Proto-Germanic *hrefiz- (cognates:
Old High German href, Old Frisian hrif belly), from PIE *kwrep- body, form, appearance (see
corporeal). More or less obsolete after 18c. except in phrase to tickle (one's) midriff to cause
laughter, the word revived 1941 in fashion usage for portion of a woman's garment that covers the
belly, as a euphemistic avoidance of belly; sense inverted and extended 1970 to a belly-baring style
of women's top.


clitoris (n.)

erectile organ of female mammals, 1610s, coined in Modern Latin from Late Greek kleitoris, a
diminutive, but the exact sense intended by the coiners is uncertain. Perhaps from Greek kleiein to
sheathe, also to shut, in reference to its being covered by the labia minora. The related Greek noun
form kleis has a second meaning of a key, a latch or hook (to close a door); see close (v.), and
compare slot (n.2).    Alternatively, perhaps related to Greek kleitys, a variant of klitys side of
a hill, itself related to klinein to slope, from the same root as climax (see lean (v.)), and with a
sense of little hill. Some ancient medical sources give a supposed Greek verb kleitoriazein to touch
or titillate lasciviously, to tickle (compare German slang der Kitzler clitoris, literally the
tickler), but the verb is likely from the anatomy in this case.    The anatomist Mateo Renaldo
Colombo (1516-1559), professor at Padua, claimed to have discovered it (De re anatomica, 1559, p.
243). He called it amor Veneris, vel dulcedo the love or sweetness of Venus. It had been known
earlier to women.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


