tiller (n.2)

one who tills, mid-13c., from till (v.).


tiller (n.1)

mid-14c., stock of a crossbow, from Old French telier stock of a crossbow (c.1200), originally
weaver's beam, from Medieval Latin telarium, from Latin tela web; loom, from PIE *teks-la-, from
root *teks- to weave (see texture). Meaning bar to turn the rudder of a boat first recorded 1620s.


husbandman

c.1300, head of a family; early 14c., tiller of the soil, from husband (n.) + man (n.).


Rototiller (n.)

1923, from roto-, from Latin rota wheel (see rotary) + tiller.


helm (n.1)

handle of a tiller, late 13c., from Old English helma rudder; position of guidance, control, from
Proto-Germanic *halbma- (cognates: Old Norse hjalm, Old High German helmo, German Helm handle), from
PIE *kelp- to hold, grasp (see helve).


helve (n.)

Old English helfe, hielfe handle of an axe or other tool or weapon, from Proto-Germanic *halb-
(cognates: Old Saxon helvi, Middle Dutch helf, Old High German halb handle of an axe, Old High
German helmo tiller); related to halter and helm (1), from PIE *kelp- to hold, grasp. In Middle
English, to holden the axe bi the helve (c.1200) meant to take something by the right end.


colonize (v.)

1620s, to settle with colonists, from stem of Latin colonus tiller of the soil, farmer (see colony);
in sense to make another place into a national dependency without regard for settlement there by
1790s (such as in reference to French activity in Egypt or British work in India), and probably
directly from colony.    No principle ought ever to be tolerated or acted upon, that does not
proceed on the basis of India being considered as the temporary residence of a great British
Establishment, for the good government of the country, upon steady and uniform principles, and of a
large British factory, for the beneficial management of its trade, upon rules applicable to the
state and manners of the country. [Henry Dundas, Chairman of the East-India Company, letter, April
2, 1800]    Related: Colonized; colonizing.


