tinge (v.)

late 15c., to dye, color slightly, from Latin tingere to dye, color (see tincture). Related: Tinged.
The noun is first recorded 1752.


mister

as a title of courtesy before a man's Christian name, mid-15c., unaccented variant of master. As a
form of address, without a name and with a tinge of rudeness, from 1760.


rapper (n.)

agent noun meaning one who raps in any sense (see rap (v.)). Before the hip-hpo performance sense
emerged c.1979, it could mean door-knocker (1630s), spirit-rapper (1755), professional perjurer
(1840), prison slang for prosecutor (1904), itinerant antiques buyer, with a tinge of shadiness
(1914). Rapster is from 1772.


silver (v.)

to cover or plate with silver, mid-15c., from silver (n.). Meaning to tinge with gray (of hair) is
from c.1600. Related: Silvered; silvering.


Tangier

port city of Morocco, Latin Tinge, said to be named for Tingis, daughter of Atlas, but probably from
Semitic tigisis harbor. In English often Tangiers, by influence of Algiers.


off-white (n.)

white with a tinge of gray or yellow, 1927, from off (adv.) + white (n.).


stake (v.2)

to risk, wager, 1520s, perhaps from notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed (see stake
(n.2)), though Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor in this usage.
Meaning to maintain surveillance (usually stake out) is first recorded 1942, American English
colloquial, probably form earlier sense of mark off territory. Related: Staked; staking.


assurance (n.)

late 14c., formal or solemn pledge, promise, also certainty, from Old French asseurance (11c.,
Modern French assurance) assurance, promise; truce; certainty, safety, security, from asseurer (see
assure). The word had a negative tinge 18c., often suggesting impudence or presumption.


stake (n.2)

that which is placed at hazard, 1530s, from stake (v.). Perhaps literally that which is put up, from
notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed, though OED points out there is no evidence of
the existence of such a custom. Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor
in this usage. Hence, an interest, something to gain or lose (1784). Plural stakes, sum of money to
be won in a (horse) race, first recorded 1690s (compare sweepstakes). To have a stake in is recorded
from 1784.


dye (n.)

Old English deah, deag a color, hue, tinge, perhaps related to deagol secret, hidden, dark, obscure,
from Proto-Germanic *daugilaz (cognates: Old Saxon dogol secret, Old High German tougal dark,
hidden, secret).


cosmopolite (n.)

late 16c., man of the world; citizen of the world, from Greek kosmopolites citizen of the world,
from kosmos world (see cosmos) + polites citizen (see politic). In common use 17c. in a neutral
sense; it faded out in 18c. but was revived from c.1800 with a tinge of reproachfulness (opposed to
patriot).


tincture (n.)

c.1400, a coloring, dye, from Latin tinctura act of dyeing or tingeing, from tinctus dye, past
participle of tingere to tinge, dye, soak in color, originally merely to moisten, wet, soak, from
PIE root *teng- to soak (cognates: Old High German dunkon to soak, Greek tengein to moisten).
Meaning solution of medicine in a mixture of alcohol is first recorded 1640s. The verb is recorded
from 1610s. Related: Tinctured.


mediocrity (n.)

early 15c., moderation; intermediate state or amount, from Middle French m&#233;diocrit&#233; and
directly from Latin mediocritatem (nominative mediocritas) a middle state, middling condition,
medium, from mediocris (see mediocre). Neutral at first; disparaging sense began to predominate from
late 16c. The meaning person of mediocre abilities or attainments is from 1690s. Before the tinge of
disparagement crept in, another name for the Golden Mean was golden mediocrity.


chroma (n.)

quality or intensity of color, 1889, from Latinized form of Greek khroma surface of the body, skin,
color of the skin, also used generically for color and, in plural, ornaments, embellishments,
related to khros surface of the body, skin, khrozein to touch the surface of the body, to tinge, to
color; the root is explained as being somehow from PIE *ghreu- to rub, grind (see grit (n.)).


provincial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a province, from Old French provincial belonging to a particular province
(of friars) (13c.), from Latin provincialis of a province, from provincia (see province).    Meaning
of the small towns and countryside (as opposed to the capital and urban center) is from 1630s, a
borrowed idiom from French, transferred from sense of particular to the province, hence local.
Suggestive of rude, petty, or narrow society by 1755. Classical Latin provincialis seems not to have
had this tinge. In British use, with reference to the American colonies, from 1680s.


decease (n.)

death, early 14c., from Old French deces (12c., Modern French d&eacute;c&egrave;s) decease, death,
from Latin decessus death (euphemism for mors), also a retirement, a departure, from decess-, past
participle stem of decedere die, depart, withdraw, literally to go down, from de- away (see de-) +
cedere go (see cede). Still used with a tinge of euphemism.


taint (v.)

1570s, to corrupt, contaminate, also to touch, tinge, imbue slightly (1590s), from Middle English
teynten to convict, prove guilty (late 14c.), partly from Old French ataint, past participle of
ataindre to touch upon, seize (see attainder). Also from Anglo-French teinter to color, dye (early
15c.), from Old French teint (12c.), past participle of teindre to dye, color, from Latin tingere
(see tincture). Related: Tainted; tainting.


carpet (n.)

late 13c., coarse cloth; mid-14c., tablecloth, bedspread; from Old French carpite heavy decorated
cloth, carpet, from Medieval Latin or Old Italian carpita thick woolen cloth, probably from Latin
carpere to card, pluck, probably so called because it was made from unraveled, shreded, plucked
fabric; from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)). Meaning shifted 15c. to floor
coverings.    From 16c.-19c. as an adjective often with a tinge of contempt, when used of men (as in
carpet-knight, 1570s) by association with luxury, ladies' boudoirs, and drawing rooms. On the carpet
summoned for reprimand is 1900, U.S. colloquial (but compare carpet (v.) call (someone) to be
reprimanded, 1823, British servants' slang). To sweep or push something under the carpet in the
figurative sense is first recorded 1953.


suburb (n.)

early 14c., area outside a town or city, whether agricultural or residential but most frequently
residential, from Old French suburbe suburb of a town, from Latin suburbium an outlying part of a
city (especially Rome), from sub below, near (see sub-) + urbs (genitive urbis) city (see urban).
Glossed in Old English as underburg. Just beyond the reach of municipal jurisdiction, suburbs had a
bad reputation in 17c. England, especially those of London, and suburban had a sense of inferior,
debased, licentious (as in suburban sinner, slang for loose woman, prostitute). By 1817, the tinge
had shifted to of inferior manners and narrow views. Compare also French equivalent faubourg.
[T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life
is carried on without the discipline of rural occupations and without the cultural resources that
the Central District of the city still retains. [Lewis Mumford, 1922]


-er (1)

English agent noun ending, corresponding to Latin -or. In native words it represents Old English
-ere (Old Northumbrian also -are) man who has to do with, from Proto-Germanic *-ari (cognates:
German -er, Swedish -are, Danish -ere), from Proto-Germanic *-arjoz. Some believe this root is
identical with, and perhaps a borrowing of, Latin -arius.    In words of Latin origin, verbs derived
from past participle stems of Latin ones (including most verbs in -ate) usually take the Latin
ending -or, as do Latin verbs that passed through French (such as governor), but there are many
exceptions (eraser, laborer, promoter, deserter, sailor, bachelor), some of which were conformed
from Latin to English in late Middle English.    The use of -or and -ee in legal language (such as
lessor/lessee) to distinguish actors and recipients of action has given the -or ending a tinge of
professionalism, and this makes it useful in doubling words that have both a professional and non-
professional sense (such as advisor/adviser, conductor/conducter, incubator/incubater,
elevator/elevater).


thou (pron.)

2nd nominative singular personal pronoun, Old English &thorn;u, from Proto-Germanic *thu (cognates:
Old Frisian thu, Middle Dutch and Middle Low German du, Old High German and German du, Old Norse
&thorn;u, Gothic &thorn;u), from PIE *tu-, second person singular pronoun (cognates: Latin tu, Irish
tu, Welsh ti, Greek su, Lithuanian tu, Old Church Slavonic ty, Sanskrit twa-m).    Superseded in
Middle English by plural form you (from a different root), but retained in certain dialects (e.g.
early Quakers). The plural at first was used in addressing superior individuals, later also (to err
on the side of propriety) strangers, and ultimately all equals. By c.1450 the use of thou to address
inferiors gave it a tinge of insult unless addressed by parents to children, or intimates to one
another. Hence the verb meaning to use 'thou' to a person (mid-15c.).  Avaunt, caitiff, dost thou
thou me! I am come of good kin, I tell thee!  [Hickscorner, c.1530]    A brief history of the second
person pronoun in English can be found here.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


