tint (v.)

1756 (implied in tinted), from tint (n.). Related: Tinting.


tint (n.)

color, 1717, alteration of tinct (c.1600), from Latin tinctus a dyeing, from tingere to dye (see
tincture); influenced by Italian tinta tint, hue, from Latin tinctus.


Titian (n.)

1824, a painting by Venetian painter Tiziano Vecellio (c.1490-1576), from Anglicized form of his
name. Often also in reference to the tint of bright auburn hair favored by him in his work.


mezzotint (n.)

1738; see mezzo + tint. As a verb, from 1827.


tinct (n.)

color, tint, c.1600, from Latin tinctus a dyeing, from tingere to dye (see tincture).


flesh (n.)

Old English fl&aelig;sc flesh, meat, also near kindred (a sense now obsolete except in phrase flesh
and blood), common West and North Germanic (compare Old Frisian flesk, Middle Low German vlees,
German Fleisch flesh, Old Norse flesk pork, bacon), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Proto-Germanic
*flaiskoz-.    Figurative use for animal or physical nature of man (Old English) is from the Bible,
especially Paul's use of Greek sarx, which yielded sense of sensual appetites (c.1200). Flesh-wound
is from 1670s; flesh-color, the hue of Caucasian skin, is first recorded 1610s, described as a tint
composed of a light pink with a little yellow [O'Neill, Dyeing, 1862]. An Old English poetry-word
for body was fl&aelig;sc-hama, literally flesh-home.


blond (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French blont fair, blond (12c.), from Medieval Latin blundus yellow, perhaps
from Frankish *blund. If it is a Germanic word, it is possibly related to Old English blonden-feax
gray-haired, from blondan, blandan to mix (see blend (v.)). According to Littr&eacute;, the original
sense of the French word was a colour midway between golden and light chestnut, which might account
for the notion of mixed.    Old English beblonden meant dyed, so it is also possible that the root
meaning of blonde, if it is Germanic, may be dyed, as ancient Teutonic warriors were noted for dying
their hair. Du Cange, however, writes that blundus was a vulgar pronunciation of Latin flavus
yellow. Another guess (discounted by German etymologists), is that it represents a Vulgar Latin
*albundus, from alba white.    The word was reintroduced into English 17c. from French, and was
until recently still felt as French, hence blonde (with French feminine ending) for females. Italian
biondo, Spanish blondo, Old Proven&ccedil;al blon all are of Germanic origin.    Fair hair was much
esteemed by both the Greeks and Romans, and so they not only dyed and gold-dusted theirs ..., but
also went so far as to gild the hair of their statues, as notably those of Venus de Medici and
Apollo. In the time of Ovid (A.U.C. 711) much fair hair was imported from Germany, by the Romans, as
it was considered quite the fashionable color. Those Roman ladies who did not choose to wear wigs of
this hue, were accustomed to powder theirs freely with gold dust, so as to give it the fashionable
yellow tint. [C. Henry Leonard, The Hair, 1879]


