title (v.)

to furnish with a title, early 14c., from title (n.). Related: Titled; titling.


title (n.)

c.1300, inscription, heading, from Old French title title or chapter of a book; position; legal
permit (12c., Modern French titre, by dissimilation), and in part from Old English titul, both from
Latin titulus inscription, label, ticket, placard, heading; honorable appellation, title of honor,
of unknown origin. Meaning name of a book, play, etc. first recorded mid-14c. The sense of name
showing a person's rank in English is first attested 1580s. Sports championship sense attested from
1913 (originally in lawn tennis), hence titlist (1913).


subtitle (n.)

also sub-title, 1825, subordinate or additional title, usually explanatory, in reference to literary
works, from sub- under + title (n.). Applied to motion pictures by 1908. As a verb from 1858.
Related: Subtitled.


dey (n.2)

1650s, title of a military commander in Muslim north Africa, from Turkish dai maternal uncle, a
friendly title used of older men, especially by the Janissaries of Algiers of their commanding
officers. There were also deys in Tunis and Tripoli.


sir

c.1300, title of honor of a knight or baronet (until 17c. also a title of priests), variant of sire,
originally used only in unstressed position. Generalized as a respectful form of address by mid-
14c.; used as a salutation at the beginning of letters from early 15c.


entitle (v.)

late 14c., to give a title to a chapter, book, etc., from Anglo-French entitler, Old French
entiteler (Modern French intituler), from Late Latin intitulare, from in- in (see in- (2)) + titulus
title (see title (n.)).    Meaning to bestow (on a person) a rank or office is mid-15c. Sense of to
give (someone) 'title' to an estate or property, hence to give that person a claim to possession or
privilege, is mid-15c.; this now is used mostly in reference to circumstances and actions. Related:
Entitled; entitling.


grandmaster (n.)

as a chess title, 1927, from grand (adj.) + master (n.). Earlier as a title in Freemasonry (1724)
and in military orders of knighthood (1550s).


untitled (adj.)

1610s, unnamed, from un- (1) not + past participle of title (v.). Meaning having no right is from
1660s; that of undistinguished by an aristocratic title is from 1798.


mikado (n.)

1727, former title of the emperor of Japan, from mi honorable + kado gate, portal. Similar to
Sublime Porte, old title of the Ottoman emperor/government, and Pharaoh, which literally means great
house.


mondo (adj.)

very much, extreme, 1979, from Italian mondo world, from Mondo cane, 1961 film, literally world for
a dog (English title A Dog's Life), depicting eccentric human behavior; the word was abstracted from
the original title and taken as an intensifier.


titrate (v.)

1854, with -ate (2) + French titrer, from titre standard, title, also fineness of alloyed gold (see
title (n.)).


madame

1590s, see madam, which is an earlier borrowing of the same French phrase. Originally a title of
respect for a woman of rank, now given to any married woman. OED recommends madam as an English
title, madame in reference to foreign women.


dauphin (n.)

eldest son of the king of France (title in use from 1349-1830), early 15c., from Middle French
dauphin, literally dolphin (see dolphin).    Originally the title attached to the Dauphin of
Viennois, whose province (in the French Alps north of Provence) came to be known as Dauphin&eacute;.
Three dolphins were on the coat of arms of the lords of Viennois, first worn by Guido IV (d.1142).
It is said originally to have been a personal name among the lords of Viennois. Humbert III, the
last lord of Dauphin&eacute;, ceded the province to Philip of Valois in 1349, on condition that the
title be perpetuated by the eldest son of the king of France. The French fem. form is dauphine.


effendi (n.)

Turkish title of respect, 1610s, from Turkish efendi, title of respect applied to professionals and
officials, corruption of Greek authentes lord, master (in Modern Greek aphente; see authentic).


rubric (n.)

c.1300, directions in religious services (often in red writing), from Old French rubrique, rubriche
rubric, title (13c.), from Latin rubrica red ochre, red coloring matter, from ruber, from PIE root
*rudhro- (see red). Meaning title or heading of a book is from early 15c. Related: Rubrical.


gastronomy (n.)

1814, from French gastronomie, coined 1800 by Joseph de Berchoux (1762-1838) as title of poem on
good living, after Gastrologia, title of a now-lost poem of antiquity, quoted by Athenaeus (see
gastrology). Berchoux's word is from gaster + nomos arranging, regulating. Related: Gastronomer.


hokey-pokey

1847, false cheap material, perhaps an alteration of hocus-pocus, or from the nonsense chorus and
title of a comic song (Hokey Pokey Whankey Fong) that was popular c.1830. Applied especially to
cheap ice cream sold by street vendors (1884), in Philadelphia, and perhaps other places, it meant
shaved ice with artificial flavoring. The words also were the title of a Weber-Fields musical revue
from 1912. The modern dance song of that name hit the U.S. in 1950 (Life described it Nov. 27, 1950,
as a tuneless stomp that is now sweeping the U.C.L.A. campus), but it is said to have originated in
Britain in World War II, perhaps from a Canadian source.


tilde (n.)

1864, from Spanish, metathesis of Catalan title, from vernacular form of Medieval Latin titulus
stroke over an abridged word to indicate missing letters, a specialized sense of Latin titulus,
literally inscription, heading (see title (n.)). The mark itself represents an -n- and was used in
Medieval Latin manuscripts in an abridged word over a preceding letter to indicate a missing -n- and
save space.


miss (n.2)

the term of honour to a young girl [Johnson], originally (c.1600) a shortened form of mistress. By
1640s as prostitute, concubine; sense of title for a young unmarried woman, girl first recorded
1660s. In the 1811 reprint of the slang dictionary, Miss Laycock is given as an underworld euphemism
for the monosyllable. Miss America is from 1922 as the title bestowed on the winner of an annual
nationwide U.S. beauty/talent contest. Earlier it meant young American women generally or the United
States personified as a young woman, and it also was the name of a fast motor boat.


genesis (n.)

Old English Genesis, first book of the Pentateuch, from Latin genesis, adopted as title of first
book of Old Testament in Vulgate, from Greek genesis origin, creation, generation, from gignesthai
to be born, related to genos race, birth, descent (see genus). As such, it translated Hebrew
bereshith, literally in the beginning, which was the first word of the text, taken as its title.
Extended sense of origin, creation first recorded in English c.1600.


marquis (n.)

also marquess, c.1300, title of nobility, from Old French marchis, literally ruler of a border area,
from Old French marche frontier, from Medieval Latin marca frontier, frontier territory (see march
(n.1)). Originally the ruler of border territories in various European regions (such as Italian
marchese, Spanish marqu&eacute;s); later a mere title of rank, below duke and above count. Related:
Marquisate.


dolce vita (n.)

life of pleasure, 1960, Italian, from title of Fellini's film.


Ghana

since 1957, name of the former Gold Coast; from the name of a former tribal chieftain, whose name
itself is a form of a royal title, hence, king.


rock (v.2)

to dance to popular music with a strong beat, 1948 (first attested in song title We're gonna rock),
from rock (v.1), in earlier blues slang sense of to cause to move with musical rhythm (1922); often
used at first with sexual overtones (as in 1922 song title My Man Rocks Me (with One Steady Roll)).
Sense developed early 1950s to play or dance to rock and roll music. Related: Rocked; rocking.
Rocksteady, Jamaican pop music style (precursor of reggae), is attested from 1969.


jungle (n.)

1776, from Hindi jangal desert, forest, wasteland, uncultivated ground, from Sanskrit jangala-s
arid, sparsely grown with trees, of unknown origin. Specific sense of land overgrown by vegetation
in a wild, tangled mass is first recorded 1849; meaning place notoriously lawless and violent is
first recorded 1906, from Upton Sinclair's novel (compare asphalt jungle, 1949, William R. Burnett's
novel title, made into a film 1950 by John Huston; blackboard jungle, 1954, Evan Hunter's novel
title, movie in 1955). Jungle gym was a trademark name, 1923, by Junglegym Inc., Chicago, U.S.
Jungle bunny, derogatory for black person, attested from 1966.


emperor (n.)

early 13c., from Old French empereor (accusative; nominative emperere; Modern French empereur), from
Latin imperiatorem (nominative imperiator) commander, emperor, from past participle stem of imperare
to command (see empire).    Originally a title conferred by vote of the Roman army on a successful
general, later by the Senate on Julius and Augustus Caesar and adopted by their successors except
Tiberius and Claudius. In the Middle Ages, applied to rulers of China, Japan, etc.; only non-
historical European application in English was to the Holy Roman Emperors (who in German documents
are called kaiser), from late 13c., until in 1804 Napoleon took the title Emperor of the French.


rabbi (n.)

Jewish doctor of religious law, late 15c. (in Old English in biblical context only; in Middle
English also as a title prefixed to personal names), from Late Latin rabbi, from Greek rhabbi, from
Mishnaic Hebrew rabbi my master, from rabh master, great one, title of respect for Jewish doctors of
law + -i, first person singular pronominal suffix. From Semitic root r-b-b to be great or numerous
(compare robh multitude; Aramaic rabh great; chief, master, teacher; Arabic rabba was great, rabb
master).


thesaurus (n.)

1823, treasury, storehouse, from Latin thesaurus treasury, a hoard, a treasure, something laid up,
figuratively repository, collection, from Greek thesauros a treasure, treasury, storehouse, chest,
from root of tithenai to put, to place (see theme). The meaning encyclopedia filled with information
is from 1840, but existed earlier as thesaurarie (1590s), used as a title by early dictionary
compilers, on the notion of thesaurus verborum a treasury of words. Meaning collection of words
arranged according to sense is first attested 1852 in Roget's title. Thesaurer is attested in Middle
English for treasurer and thesaur treasure was in use 15c.-16c.


san

Japanese honorific title, 1878, short form of more formal sama.


civil disobedience (n.)

coined 1866 by Thoreau as title of an essay originally published (1849) as Resistance to Civil
Government.


Christ (n.)

title given to Jesus of Nazareth, Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus, from
Greek khristos the anointed (translation of Hebrew mashiah; see messiah), noun use of verbal
adjective of khriein to rub, anoint (see chrism). The Latin term drove out Old English H&aelig;land
healer, savior, as the preferred descriptive term for Jesus.    A title, treated as a proper name in
Old English, but not regularly capitalized until 17c. Pronunciation with long -i- is result of Irish
missionary work in England, 7c.-8c. The ch- form, regular since c.1500 in English, was rare before.
Capitalization of the word begins 14c. but is not fixed until 17c. The 17c. mystical sect of the
Familists edged it toward a verb with Christed made one with Christ.


childe (n.)

youth of gentle birth, used as a kind of title, late Old English, variant spelling of child (q.v.).


kami

Japanese for superior, lord, a title given to governors, also used of deities; the word was chosen
by Japanese converts and Protestant missionaries to refer to the Christian god.


Fuhrer (n.)

1934, from F&uuml;hrer und Reichskanzler, title assumed by Hitler in 1934 as head of the German
state, from German F&uuml;hrer leader, from f&uuml;hren to lead, from Middle High German v&uuml;eren
to lead, drive, from Old High German fuoren to set in motion, lead, causative of Old High German
faran to go, travel, which is cognate with Old English faran (see fare (v.)). Hitler's title was
modeled on Mussolini's Duce.


panchen

Tibetian Buddhist title of respect, 1763, abbreviation of pandi-tachen-po, literally great learned
one.


mister

as a title of courtesy before a man's Christian name, mid-15c., unaccented variant of master. As a
form of address, without a name and with a tinge of rudeness, from 1760.


ayatollah (n.)

honorific title for an Iranian Shiite religious leader, 1950, from Persian, from Arabic ayatu-llah,
literally miraculous sign of God.


Gradus ad Parnassum

Latin, literally A Step to Parnassus, mountain sacred to Apollo and the Muses, title of a dictionary
of prosody used in English public schools for centuries as a guide to Roman poetry. The book dates
from the 1680s.


Mitty

adventurous daydreamer, 1950, from title character in The Secret Life of Walter Mitty, short story
by U.S. author James Thurber (1894-1961) first published in the New Yorker March 18, 1939.


annus mirabilis (n.)

1667, Latin, literally wonderful year, year of wonders, title of a publication by Dryden, with
reference to 1666, which was a year of calamities in London (plague, fire, war).


Lolita

fem. proper name, diminutive of Lola. Title and name of character in the 1958 novel by Vladimir
Nabokov (1899-1977) about a precocious schoolgirl seduced by an older man; by 1960 the name was in
widespread figurative use.


squatter (n.)

settler who occupies land without legal title, 1788, agent noun from squat (v.); in reference to
paupers or homeless people in uninhabited buildings, it is recorded from 1880.


Gotterdammerung

from German G&ouml;tterd&auml;mmerung, literally twilight of the gods, used by Wagner as the title
of the last opera in the Ring cycle; used in English from 1909 in the figurative sense of complete
overthrow of something.


operative (n.)

worker, operator, 1809, from operative (adj.); sense of secret agent, spy is first attested 1930,
probably from its use by the Pinkerton Detective Agency as a title for their private detectives
(1905).


Hell&#039;s Angels

motorcycle club, first attested 1957. They were called Black Rebels in the 1954 film The Wild One.
Earlier the phrase had been used as the title of a film about World War I air combat (1930).


supercalifragilisticexpialidocious

from song in 1964 Disney movie version of Mary Poppins; subject of a lawsuit based on earlier song
title Supercalafajalistickexpialadojus (1949), but other versions of the word also were in
circulation.


secretary (n.)

late 14c., person entrusted with secrets, from Medieval Latin secretarius clerk, notary,
confidential officer, confidant, a title applied to various confidential officers, noun use of
adjective meaning private, secret, pertaining to private or secret matters (compare Latin
secretarium a council-chamber, conclave, consistory), from Latin secretum a secret, a hidden thing
(see secret (n.)).    Meaning person who keeps records, write letters, etc., originally for a king,
first recorded c.1400. As title of ministers presiding over executive departments of state, it is
from 1590s. The word also is used in both French and English to mean a private desk, sometimes in
French form secretaire. The South African secretary bird so called (1786) in reference to its crest,
which, when smooth, resembles a pen stuck over the ear. Compare Late Latin silentiarius privy
councilor, 'silentiary, from Latin silentium a being silent.


guv

1890, shortening of guvner, casual British pronunciation of governor as a title of respect.


excellency (n.)

high rank, c.1200, from Latin excellentia (see excellence); as a title of honor it dates from early
14c.


heading (n.)

c.1300, a beheading, from present participle of head (v.). Meaning advancing in a certain direction
is from c.1600. Meaning title at the head of a portion of text is from 1849.


