toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


tog (n.)

1708, outer garment, shortened from togman cloak, loose coat (1560s), thieves' cant word, formed
from French togue cloak, from Latin toga (see toga). Middle English toge toga (14c.) also was a cant
word for a coat.


tunicate (adj.)

1760, from Latin tunicatus clothed with a tunic only (i.e. without a toga), in shirt-sleeves, past
participle of tunicare to clothe in a tunic, from tunica (see tunic). As a noun, from 1848.


sinus (n.)

hollow curve or cavity in the body, early 15c., from Medieval Latin sinus, from Latin sinus bend,
fold, curve, a bent surface; a bay, bight, gulf; a fold in land; also fold of the toga about the
breast, hence bosom, and figuratively love, affection, intimacy; interior, inmost part; of unknown
origin.


pall (n.)

Old English p&aelig;ll rich cloth or cloak, purple robe, altar cloth, from Latin pallium cloak,
coverlet, covering, in Tertullian, the garment worn by Christians instead of the Roman toga; related
to pallo robe, cloak, palla long upper garment of Roman women, perhaps from the root of pellis skin.
Notion of cloth spread over a coffin (mid-15c.) led to figurative sense of dark, gloomy mood (1742).


tow (v.)

pull with a rope, Old English togian to drag, pull, from Proto-Germanic *tugojanan (cognates: Old
English teon to draw, Old Frisian togia to pull about, Old Norse toga, Old High German zogon, German
ziehen to draw, pull, drag), from PIE root *deuk- to pull, draw (cognates: Latin ducere to lead; see
duke (n.)). Related: Towed; towing.


gown (n.)

c.1300, from Old French goune robe, coat, habit, gown, from Late Latin gunna leather garment, skin,
hide, of unknown origin. Used by St. Boniface (8c.) for a fur garment permitted for old or infirm
monks. Klein writes it is probably a word adopted from a language of the Apennine or the Balkan
Peninsula. OED points to Byzantine Greek gouna, a word for a coarse garment sometimes made of skins,
but also notes some scholars regard [Late Latin gunna] as of Celtic origin.    In 18c., gown was the
common word for what is now usually styled a dress. It was maintained more in the U.S. than in
Britain, but was somewhat revived 20c. in fashion senses and in comb. forms (such as bridal gown,
nightgown). Meaning flowing robe worn as a badge of office or authority is from late 14c., on image
of the Roman toga. As collective singular for residents of a university (1650s) it usually now is
opposed to town.


