token (adj.)

nominal, 1915, from token (n.). In integration sense, first recorded 1960.


token (n.)

Old English tacen sign, symbol, evidence (related to verb t&aelig;can show, explain, teach), from
Proto-Germanic *taiknam (cognates: Old Saxon tekan, Old Norse teikn zodiac sign, omen, token, Old
Frisian tekan, Middle Dutch teken, Dutch teken, Old High German zeihhan, German zeichen, Gothic
taikn sign, token), from PIE root *deik- to show (see teach).    Meaning coin-like piece of stamped
metal is first recorded 1590s. Older sense of evidence is retained in by the same token (mid-15c.),
originally introducing a corroborating circumstance [OED].


tokenism (n.)

1962, from token (adj.) in the integration sense + -ism.


symbol (n.)

early 15c., creed, summary, religious belief, from Late Latin symbolum creed, token, mark, from
Greek symbolon token, watchword, sign by which one infers; ticket, a permit, license (the word was
applied c.250 by Cyprian of Carthage to the Apostles' Creed, on the notion of the mark that
distinguishes Christians from pagans), literally that which is thrown or cast together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile,
bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics).    The sense evolution
in Greek is from throwing things together to contrasting to comparing to token used in comparisons
to determine if something is genuine. Hence, outward sign of something. The meaning something which
stands for something else first recorded 1590 (in Faerie Queene). As a written character, 1610s.


sign (n.)

early 13c., gesture or motion of the hand, especially one meant to communicate something, from Old
French signe sign, mark, from Latin signum identifying mark, token, indication, symbol; proof;
military standard, ensign; a signal, an omen; sign in the heavens, constellation, according to
Watkins, literally standard that one follows, from PIE *sekw-no-, from root *sekw- (1) to follow
(see sequel).    Ousted native token. Meaning a mark or device having some special importance is
recorded from late 13c.; that of a miracle is from c.1300. Zodiacal sense in English is from mid-
14c. Sense of characteristic device attached to the front of an inn, shop, etc., to distinguish it
from others is first recorded mid-15c. Meaning token or signal of some condition (late 13c.) is
behind sign of the times (1520s). In some uses, the word probably is a shortening of ensign. Sign
language is recorded from 1847; earlier hand-language (1670s).


con (adj.)

swindling, 1889, American English, from confidence man (1849), from the many scams in which the
victim is induced to hand over money as a token of confidence. Confidence with a sense of assurance
based on insufficient grounds dates from 1590s.


lingam (n.)

phallic emblem under which Siva is worshipped, 1719, from Sanskrit linga (nominative lingam) mark,
token, sign, emblem, of unknown origin.


acknowledgement (n.)

1590s, act of acknowledging, from acknowledge + -ment. An early instance of -ment added to an orig.
Eng. vb. [OED]. Meaning token of due recognition is recorded from 1610s.


handkerchief (n.)

1520s, from hand + kerchief cloth for covering the head. Thus it is a one-word contradiction in
terms. By-form handkercher was in use 16c.-19c. A dropped handkerchief as a token of flirtation or
courtship is attested by mid-18c.


Zen (n.)

school of Mahayana Buddhism, 1727, from Japanese, from Chinese ch'an, ultimately from Sanskrit
dhyana thought, meditation, from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Greek sema sign, mark,
token). As an adjective from 1881.


symbology (n.)

1840, contracted from symbolology, from comb. form of Greek symbolon token (see symbol) + -ology.


penance (n.)

late 13c., religious discipline or self-mortification as a token of repentance and as atonement for
some sin, from Anglo-French penaunce, Old French peneance (12c.), from Latin p&aelig;nitentia (see
penitence). Transferred sense is recorded from c.1300.


portent (n.)

1560s, from Middle French portente, from Latin portentum a sign, token, omen; monster, monstrosity,
noun use of neuter of portentus, past participle of portendre (see portend).


tetchy (adj.)

easily irritated, 1592, teachie, in Romeo &amp; Juliet I.iii.32; of uncertain origin. Perhaps from
Middle English tatch a mark, quality, derived via Old French from Vulgar Latin *tecca, from a
Germanic source akin to Old English tacen (see token).


wooden (adj.)

1530s, from wood (n.) + -en (2). Figurative use by 1560s. Wooden nickel counterfeit coin, worthless
token is from 1916, American English. Related: Woodenly; woodenness.


semiology (n.)

1690s, sign language, from Greek semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema (compare semiotic) + -ology.
As branch of medical science concerned with symptoms, 1839; as logical theory of signs from 1923.
Related: Semiological.


signification (n.)

early 14c., symbolization, representation, from Old French significacion and directly from Latin
significationem (nominative significatio) a signifying, indication, expression, sign, token,
meaning, emphasis, noun of action from past participle stem of significare make known, indicate (see
signify). From late 14c. as meaning (of a word, etc.).


betoken (v.)

late 12c., from be- + Old English tacnian to signify, from tacn sign (see token). Related:
Betokened; betokening.


slug (n.2)

lead bit, 1620s, perhaps a special use of slug (n.1), perhaps on some supposed resemblance. Meaning
token or counterfeit coin first recorded 1881; meaning strong drink first recorded 1756, perhaps
from slang fire a slug take a drink, though it also may be related to Irish slog swallow. Journalism
sense is from 1925, originally a short guideline for copy editors at the head of a story.


tessera (n.)

plural tesserae, small, square piece of stone, 1650s, from Latin tessera a die, cube, square tablet
with writing on it used as a token or ticket, from Ionic Greek tessera, neuter of tesseres (Attic
tessares) four (see four).


semiotic (adj.)

1620s, of symptoms, relating to signs of diseases, from Greek semeiotikos significant, also
observant of signs, adjective form of semeiosis indication, from semeioun to signal, to interpret a
sign, from semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema sign (see semantic). Its use in psychology dates
to 1923. Related: Semiotical (1580s).


semantic (adj.)

1894, from French s&eacute;mantique, applied by Michel Br&eacute;al (1883) to the psychology of
language, from Greek semantikos significant, from semainein to show by sign, signify, point out,
indicate by a sign, from sema sign, mark, token; omen, portent; constellation; grave (Doric sama),
from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Sanskrit dhyati he meditates; see zen).


olive (n.)

c.1200, olive tree, from Old French olive olive, olive tree (13c.) or directly from Latin oliva
olive, olive tree, from Greek elaia olive tree, olive, probably from the same Aegean language
(perhaps Cretan) as Armenian ewi oil. Applied to the fruit or berry of the tree in English from late
14c. As a color from 17c. Olive branch as a token of peace is from early 13c.


benevolence (n.)

c.1400, disposition to do good, from Old French benivolence and directly from Latin benevolentia
good feeling, good will, kindness, from bene well (see bene-) + volantem (nominative volens) present
participle of velle to wish (see will (v.)). In English history, this was the name given to forced
extra-legal loans or contributions to the crown, first so called 1473 by Edward IV, who cynically
asked it as a token of good will toward his rule.


caduceus (n.)

1590s, from Latin caduceus, alteration of Doric Greek karykeion herald's staff, from karyx (genitive
karykos) a herald, from PIE *karu-, from root *kar- to praise loudly, extol (cognates: Sanskrit
carkarti mentions with praise, Old English hre&eth; fame, glory). Token of a peaceful embassy;
originally an olive branch. Especially the wand carried by Mercury, messenger of the gods, usually
represented with two serpents twined round it.


souvenir (n.)

1775, a remembrance or memory, from French souvenir (12c.), from Old French noun use of souvenir
(v.) to remember, come to mind, from Latin subvenire come to mind, from sub- up from below (see
sub-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning token of remembrance, memento is first recorded 1782.


tribute (n.)

mid-14c., stated sum of money or other valuable consideration paid by one ruler or country to
another in acknowledgment of submission or as the price of peace or protection, from Anglo-French
tribute, Old French tribut and directly from Latin tributum tribute, a stated payment, a thing
contributed or paid, noun use of neuter of tributus, past participle of tribuere to pay, assign,
grant, also allot among the tribes or to a tribe, from tribus (see tribe). Sense of offering, gift,
token is first recorded 1580s.


seal (n.1)

design stamped on wax, especially one attached to a document as evidence of authenticity, c.1200,
from Old French seel seal on a letter (Modern French sceau), from Vulgar Latin *sigellum (source of
Italian suggello, Spanish sello; also Old Frisian and Middle High German sigel, German Siegel), from
Latin sigillum small picture, engraved figure, seal, diminutive of signum mark, token (see sign
(n.)). An earlier borrowing directly from Latin is represented by Old English insigel. Technical
use, what prevents the escape of a gas or liquid is from 1853.


trophy (n.)

1510s, a spoil or prize of war, from Middle French troph&eacute;e (15c.) from Latin trophaeum a sign
of victory, monument, originally tropaeum, from Greek tropaion monument of an enemy's defeat, noun
use of neuter of adjective tropaios of defeat, causing a rout, from trope a rout, originally a
turning (of the enemy); see trope. In ancient Greece, spoils or arms taken in battle and set up on
the field and dedicated to a god. Figurative extension to any token or memorial of victory is first
recorded 1560s. As a symbolic representation of a classical trophy from 1630s. Trophy wife attested
by 1984.


kenning (n.)

Old English cenning procreation; declaration in court, present participle of ken (v.). From early
14c. in senses sign, token; teaching, instruction; c.1400 as mental cognition. From 1871 as
periphrastic expression in early Germanic poetry; in this sense it probably is from a modern learned
use of Old Norse cognate verb kenna to know, to recognize, to feel or perceive; to call, to name (in
a formal poetic metaphor).    In the whole poem of Beowulf there are scarcely half a dozen of them
[similes], and these of the simplest character, such as comparing a ship to a bird. Indeed, such a
simple comparison as this is almost equivalent to the more usual kenning (as it is called in
Icelandic), such as brimfugol, where, instead of comparing the ship to a bird, the poet simply calls
it a sea-bird, preferring the direct assertion to the indirect comparison. [Henry Sweet, Sketches of
the History of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, London, 1871]


gauntlet (n.1)

glove, early 15c., gantelet, from Old French gantelet (13c.) gauntlet worn by a knight in armor,
also a token of one's personality or person, and symbolizing a challenge, as in tendre son gantelet
throw down the gauntlet (a sense found in English by 1540s); semi-diminutive or double-diminutive of
gant glove (12c.), earlier wantos (7c.), from Frankish *wanth-, from Proto-Germanic *wantuz glove
(cognates: Middle Dutch want mitten, East Frisian want, wante, Old Norse v&ouml;ttr glove, Danish
vante mitten), which apparently is related to Old High German wintan, Old English windan turn
around, wind (see wind (v.)).    The name must orig. have applied to a strip of cloth wrapped about
the hand to protect it from sword-blows, a frequent practice in the Icelandic sagas. [Buck]
Italian guanto, Spanish guante are likewise ultimately from Germanic. The spelling with -u- was
established from 1500s.


teach (v.)

Old English t&aelig;can (past tense t&aelig;hte, past participle t&aelig;ht) to show, point out,
declare, demonstrate, also to give instruction, train, assign, direct; warn; persuade, from Proto-
Germanic *taikijan to show (cognates: Old High German zihan, German zeihen to accuse, Gothic ga-
teihan to announce), from PIE *deik- to show, point out (see diction). Related to Old English tacen,
tacn sign, mark (see token). Related: Taught; teaching.    enraged Lemonade Vendor [Edgar Kennedy]:
I'll teach you to kick me!   Chico: you don't have to teach me, I know how. [kicks him]    The usual
sense of Old English t&aelig;can was show, declare, warn, persuade (compare German zeigen to show,
from the same root); while the Old English word for to teach, instruct, guide was more commonly
l&aelig;ran, source of modern learn and lore.


check (n.1)

c.1300, a call in chess noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in
immediate peril, from Old French eschequier a check at chess (also chess board, chess set), from
eschec the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate, from Vulgar Latin *scaccus, from Arabic
shah, from Persian shah king, the principal piece in a chess game (see shah; also compare checkmate
(n.)). Also c.1300 in a generalized sense, harmful incident or event.    When the king is in check
that player's choices are severely limited. Hence, sudden stoppage (early 14c.), and by c.1700 to a
token of ownership used to check against, and prevent, loss or theft (surviving in hat check) and a
check against forgery or alteration, which gave the modern financial use of bank check, money draft
(first recorded 1798 and often spelled cheque), probably influenced by exchequer. Checking account
is attested from 1897, American English. Blank check in the figurative sense attested by 1849.
Checks and balances is from 1782, perhaps originally suggesting machinery.


mark (n.1)

trace, impression, Old English mearc (West Saxon), merc (Mercian) boundary, sign, limit, mark, from
Proto-Germanic *marko (cognates: Old Norse merki boundary, sign, m&ouml;rk forest, which often
marked a frontier; Old Frisian merke, Gothic marka boundary, frontier, Dutch merk mark, brand,
German Mark boundary, boundary land), from PIE *merg- edge, boundary, border (cognates: Latin margo
margin; Avestan mareza- border, Old Irish mruig, Irish bruig borderland, Welsh bro district).    The
primary sense is probably boundary, which had evolved by Old English through sign of a boundary,
through sign in general, then to impression or trace forming a sign. Meaning any visible trace or
impression first recorded c.1200. Sense of line drawn to indicate starting point of a race (as in on
your marks ...) first attested 1887. The Middle English sense of target (c.1200) is the notion in
marksman and slang sense victim of a swindle (1883). The notion of sign, token is behind the meaning
numerical award given by a teacher (1829). Influenced by Scandinavian cognates.


