toll (n.)

tax, fee, Old English toll impost, tribute, passage-money, rent, variant of toln, cognate with Old
Norse tollr, Old Frisian tolen, Old High German zol, German Zoll, probably representing an early
Germanic borrowing from Late Latin tolonium custom house, from Latin telonium tollhouse, from Greek
teloneion tollhouse, from telones tax-collector, from telos tax (see tele-; for sense, compare
finance). On the other theory it is native Germanic and related to tell (v.) on the notion of that
which is counted. Originally in a general sense of payment exacted by an authority; meaning charge
for right of passage along a road is from late 15c.


tollbooth (n.)

early 14c., originally a tax collector's booth, from toll (n.) + booth.


toll (v.)

to sound with slow single strokes (intransitive), mid-15c., probably a special use of tollen to
draw, lure, early 13c. variant of Old English -tyllan in betyllan to lure, decoy, and fortyllan draw
away, seduce, of obscure origin. The notion is perhaps of luring people to church with the sound of
the bells, or of drawing on the bell rope. Transitive sense from late 15c. Related: Tolled; tolling.
The noun meaning a stroke of a bell is from mid-15c.


turnpike (n.)

early 15c., spiked road barrier used for defense, from turn + pike (n.2) shaft. Sense transferred to
horizontal cross of timber, turning on a vertical pin (1540s), which were used to bar horses from
foot roads. This led to the sense of barrier to stop passage until a toll is paid (1670s). Meaning
road with a toll gate is from 1748, shortening of turnpike road (1745).


zollverein (n.)

1843, from German Zollverein, literally customs union, from Zoll toll (see toll (n.)) + Verein
union, from vereinen to unite, from ver- + ein one (see one).


custom (n.)

c.1200, habitual practice, from Old French costume custom, habit, practice; clothes, dress (12c.,
Modern French coutume), from Vulgar Latin *consuetumen, from Latin consuetudinem (nominative
consuetudo) habit, usage, way, practice, tradition, familiarity, from consuetus, past participle of
consuescere accustom, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + suescere become used to, accustom
oneself, related to sui, genitive of suus oneself, from PIE *swe- oneself (see idiom). Replaced Old
English &thorn;eaw. Sense of a regular toll or tax on goods is early 14c. The native word here is
toll.


Travis

masc. proper name, also a surname (late 12c.), from an Old French word meaning to cross over,
related to traverse (v.). Probably a name for a gatekeeper or the toll collector of a bridge.


throughway (n.)

expressway, large toll road, 1934, American English, from through + way (n.).


ashram (n.)

religious hermitage, 1917, from Sanskrit asramah, from a-, adnomial prefix, + sramah effort, toll,
fatigue.


knell (v.)

Old English cnyllan to toll a bell; strike, knock, cognate with Middle High German erknellen to
resound, Old Norse knylla to beat, thrash; probably imitative. Related: Knelled; knelling.


anchorage (n.)

mid-14c., toll or charge for anchoring (see anchor (v.) + -age. Meaning act of dropping anchor,
being at anchor is from 1610s; that of place suitable for anchoring is from 1706. The Alaska city of
Anchorage was founded 1914.


till (n.)

cashbox, mid-15c., from Anglo-French tylle compartment, Old French tille compartment, shelter on a
ship, probably from Old Norse &thorn;ilja plank, floorboard, from Proto-Germanic *theljon. The other
theory [Klein, Century Dictionary] is that the word is from Middle English tillen to draw, from Old
English -tyllan (see toll (v.)), with a sense evolution as in drawer (see draw (v.)).


dull (adj.)

c.1200, stupid; early 13c., blunt, not sharp; rare before mid-14c., apparently from Old English dol
dull-witted, foolish, or an unrecorded parallel word, or from Middle Low German dul slow-witted,
both from Proto-Germanic *dulaz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon dol foolish, Old High German
tol, German toll mad, wild, Gothic dwals foolish), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke (and
related notions of defective perception or wits). Of color from early 15c.; of pain or other
sensations from 1725. Sense of boring first recorded 1580s.    dull. (8) Not exhilarating; not
delightful; as to make dictionaries is dull work. [Johnson]   Dullsville, slang for town where
nothing happens, attested from 1960.


scavenger (n.)

1540s, originally person hired to remove refuse from streets, from Middle English scawageour (late
14c.), London official in charge of collecting tax on goods sold by foreign merchants, from Anglo-
French scawager, from scawage toll or duty on goods offered for sale in one's precinct (c.1400),
from Old North French escauwage inspection, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German scouwon,
Old English sceawian to look at, inspect; see show (v.)).    It has come to be regarded as an agent
noun in -er, but the verb is a late back-formation from the noun. With intrusive -n- (c.1500) as in
harbinger, passenger, messenger. Extended to animals 1590s. Scavenger hunt is attested from 1937.


robber (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French robbere, Old French robeor, agent noun from rober (see rob). Robber
baron  in the corrupt, greedy financier sense is attested from 1870s, from a comparison of Gilded
Age capitalists to medieval European warlords.    It is the attempt of the more shrewd to take
advantage of the less shrewd. It is the attempt of the strong to oppress the weak. It is the old
robber baron in his castle descending, after men have planted their crops, and stealing them. [Henry
Ward Beecher, sermon, Truthfulness, 1871] <hr />   Regulation by combination means that the railroad
managers are feudal lords and that you are their serfs. It means that every car load of grain or
other produce of your fields and shops that passes over the New York Central shall pay heavy toll
for right of transit to Vanderbilt, the robber baron of our modern feudalism, who dominates that
way. [W.C. Flagg, testimony to Congress, 1874]


philately (n.)

stamp-collecting, 1865, from French philat&#233;lie, coined by French stamp collector Georges Herpin
(in Le Collectionneur de Timbres-poste, Nov. 15, 1864), from Greek phil- loving (see philo-) +
ateleia exemption from tax, the closest word Herpin could find in ancient Greek to the concept of
postage stamp (from a- without + telos tax; see toll (n.)). A reminder of the original function of
postage stamps, now often forgotten: the cost of letter-carrying formerly was paid by the recipient;
stamps indicated it had been pre-paid by the sender, thus the letters were carriage-free.    It is a
pity that for one of the most popular scientific pursuits one of the least popularly intelligible
names should have been found. [Fowler] Stampomania (1865) also was tried. Stamp-collecting is from
1862.  Related: Philatelic; philatelism; philatelist.


