tome (n.)

1510s, a single volume of a multi-volume work, from Middle French tome (16c.), from Latin tomus
section of a book, tome, from Greek tomos volume, section of a book, originally a section, piece cut
off, from temnein to cut, from PIE *tem- to cut (cognates: second element in Latin aestimare to
value, appraise, Old Church Slavonic tina to cleave, split, Middle Irish tamnaim I cut off, Welsh
tam morsel). Sense of a large book is attested from 1570s.


-tomy

word-forming element meaning a cutting (especially a surgical incision or removal), from Greek
-tomia a cutting of, from tome a cutting, section (see tome).


tmesis (n.)

1580s, from Greek tmesis a cutting, related to temnein to cut, tome a cutting (see tome). The
separation of the elements of a compound word by the interposition of another word or words (such as
a whole nother).


phlebotomy (n.)

bloodletting, c.1400, flebotomye, from Old French flebotomie (13c., Modern French phl&#233;botomie),
from medical Latin phlebotomia, from Greek phlebotomia blood-letting, from phlebotomos opening
veins, from phleps (genitive phlebos) vein + -tomia cutting of, from tome a cutting (see tome).


tomography (n.)

1935, from comb. form of Greek tomos slice, section (see tome) + -graphy.


dichotomy (n.)

c.1600, from Greek dichotomia a cutting in half, from dicha in two, asunder (related to dis twice) +
temnein to cut (see tome).


-ectomy

word-forming element meaning surgical removal, from Greek -ektomia a cutting out of, from ektemnein
to cut out, from ek out (see ex-) + temnein to cut (see tome).


diatom (n.)

1845, coined from Greek diatomos cut in two, from diatemnein to cut through, from dia- through (see
dia-) + temnein to cut (see tome). So called because they typically appear to have been cut in half.
Related: Diatomic.


epitome (n.)

1520s, an abstract; brief statement of the chief points of some writing, from Middle French
&eacute;pitom&eacute; (16c.), from Latin epitome abridgment, from Greek epitome abridgment, from
epitemnein cut short, abridge, from epi into (see epi-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Sense of person
or thing that typifies something is first recorded c.1600.


tonsure (n.)

late 14c., shaving of the head or part of it, especially as a religious rite, from Anglo-French
tonsure (mid-14c.), Old French tonsure ecclesiastical tonsure; sheep-shearing (14c.), from Latin
tonsura a shearing, clipping, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear, shave, clip, crop,
from PIE *tend-, from root *tem- to cut (see tome). The verb is attested from 1706 (implied in
tonsured). Related: Tonsuring.


atom (n.)

late 15c., as a hypothetical indivisible body, the building block of the universe, from Latin atomus
(especially in Lucretius) indivisible particle, from Greek atomos uncut, unhewn; indivisible, from
a- not + tomos a cutting, from temnein to cut (see tome). An ancient term of philosophical
speculation (in Leucippus, Democritus), revived 1805 by British chemist John Dalton. In late
classical and medieval use also a unit of time, 22,560 to the hour. Atom bomb is from 1945 as both a
noun and a verb; compare atomic.


anatomy (n.)

late 14c., study of the structure of living beings; c.1400, anatomical structures, from Old French
anatomie, from Late Latin anatomia, from Greek anatomia, from anatome dissection, from ana- up (see
ana-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Dissection (1540s), mummy (1580s), and skeleton (1590s) were
primary senses of this word in Shakespeare's day; meaning the science of the structure of organized
bodies predominated from 17c. Often mistakenly divided as an atomy or a natomy.The scyence of the
Nathomy is nedefull and necessarye to the Cyrurgyen [1541]


temple (n.1)

building for worship, edifice dedicated to the service of a deity or deities, Old English tempel,
from Latin templum piece of ground consecrated for the taking of auspices, building for worship of a
god, of uncertain signification. Commonly referred to PIE root *tem- to cut (see tome), on notion of
place reserved or cut out [Watkins], or to root *temp- to stretch [Klein's sources], on notion of
cleared space in front of an altar (see tenet). Compare Greek temenos sacred area around a temple,
literally place cut off, from stem of temnein to cut. Figurative sense of any place regarded as
occupied by divine presence was in Old English. Applied to Jewish synagogues from 1590s.


entomology (n.)

1766, from French entomologie (1764), coined from Greek entomon insect + -logia study of (see
-logy). Entomon is neuter of entomos having a notch or cut (at the waist), from en in (see en- (2))
+ temnein to cut (see tome).    So called by Aristotle in reference to the segmented division of
insect bodies. Compare insect. Related: Entomological. Hybrid insectology (1766, from French
insectologie, 1744) is not much used.  I have given the name insectology to that part of natural
history which has insects for its object; that of entomology ... would undoubtedly have been more
suitable ... but its barbarous sound terryfy'd me. [Charles Bonnet's English translation of his
Contemplation de la nature, 1766]


