torpor (n.)

lethargy, listlessness, c.1600, from Latin torpor numbness, sluggishness, from torpere be numb, be
inactive, be dull, from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic trupeti, Lithuanian tirpstu to become rigid; Greek stereos solid; Old English steorfan to
die; see stereo-).


heaviness (n.)

Old English hefigness heaviness, weight; burden, affliction; dullness, torpor; see heavy + -ness.


torpid (adj.)

1610s, benumbed, without feeling or power, from Latin torpidus benumbed, stupefied, from torpere be
numb or stiff (see torpor). Figurative sense of sluggish, dull, apathetic is from 1650s. Related:
Torpidly; torpidness.


sterile (adj.)

mid-15c., barren, from Middle French st&eacute;rile not producing fruit, from Latin sterilis barren,
unproductive, unfruitful; unrequited; unprofitable, from PIE *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong
(see stereo-). Also see torpor. Originally in English with reference to soil; of persons (chiefly
females), from 1530s. The sense of sterilized, free from living germs is first recorded 1877.


torpedo (n.)

1520s, electric ray (flat fish that produces an electric charge to stun prey or for defense), from
Latin torpedo electric ray, originally numbness, sluggishness (the fish so called from the effect of
being jolted by the ray's electric discharges), from torpere be numb (see torpor).    Torpedo. A
fish which while alive, if touched even with a long stick, benumbs the hand that so touches it, but
when dead is eaten safely. [Johnson]    The sense of explosive device used to blow up enemy ships is
first recorded 1776, as a floating mine; the self-propelled version is from c.1900. Related:
Torpedic.


stare (v.)

Old English starian to stare, gaze, look fixedly at, from Proto-Germanic *staren be rigid (cognates:
Old Norse stara, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staren, Old High German staren, German starren
to stare at; German starren to stiffen, starr stiff; Old Norse storr proud; Old High German storren
to stand out, project; Gothic andstaurran to be obstinate), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm,
stiff, rigid (see stereo- and compare torpor).    Not originally implying rudeness. To stare
(someone) down is from 1848. Related: Stared; staring.


