torque (v.)

1570s (implied in torqued twisted), from torque (n.).


torque (n.)

rotating force, 1882, from Latin torquere to twist, turn, turn about, twist awry, distort, torture,
from PIE *torkw-eyo-, causative of *terkw- to twist (see thwart (adv.)). The word also is used
(since 1834) by antiquarians and others as a term for the twisted metal necklace worn anciently by
Gauls, Britons, Germans, etc., from Latin torques collar of twisted metal, from torquere. Earlier it
had been called in English torques (1690s). Torque-wrench is from 1941.


torticollis (n.)

wryneck, 1811, Modern Latin, from Latin tortus crooked, twisted, from torquere to twist (see torque
(n.)) + collum neck (see collar (n.)).


extortion (n.)

c.1300, from Latin extortionem (nominative extortio) a twisting out, extorting, noun of action from
past participle stem of extorquere wrench out, wrest away, to obtain by force, from ex- out (see
ex-) + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)).


truss (n.)

c.1200, collection of things bound together, from Old French trousse, torse parcel, package, bundle,
of uncertain origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *torciare to twist, from Late Latin torquere (see
torque (n.)). Meaning surgical appliance to support a rupture, etc. first attested 1540s. Sense of
framework for supporting a roof or bridge is first recorded 1650s.


distort (v.)

1580s, from Latin distortus, past participle of distorquere to twist different ways, distort, from
dis- completely + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Related: Distorted; distorting.


contort (v.)

early 15c., from Latin contortus, past participle of contorquere to whirl, twist together, from com-
together or intensive (see com-) + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Related: Contorted;
contorting.


tort (n.)

mid-13c., injury, wrong, from Old French tort wrong, injustice, crime (11c.), from Medieval Latin
tortum injustice, noun use of neuter of tortus wrung, twisted, past participle of Latin torquere
turn, turn awry, twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Legal sense of breach of a duty, whereby
someone acquires a right of action for damages is first recorded 1580s.


tortuous (adj.)

late 14c., full of twists and turns, from Anglo-French tortuous (12c.), Old French tortuos, from
Latin tortuosus full of twists, winding, from tortus a twisting, winding, from stem of torquere to
twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Related: Tortuously; tortuousness.


retort (v.)

1550s, make return in kind (especially of an injury), from Old French retort and directly from Latin
retortus, past participle of retorquere turn back, twist back, throw back, from re- back (see re-) +
torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Applied to exchanges of jest or sarcasm by c.1600, hence say or
utter sharply and aggressively in reply (1620s). Related: Retorted; retorting.


torsion (n.)

early 15c., wringing pain in the bowels, from Old French torsion colic (early 14c.), from Late Latin
torsionem (nominative torsio) a wringing or gripping, from Latin tortionem (nominative tortio)
torture, torment, noun of action from past participle stem of torquere to twist, distort, torture
(see torque (n.)). Meaning act or effect of twisting as by opposing forces is first recorded 1540s.


nasturtium (n.)

mid-12c., plant of the mustard family, like watercress, from Latin nasturtium cress; the popular
etymology explanation of the name (Pliny) is that it is from Latin *nasitortium, literally nose-
twist, from nasus nose (see nose (n.)) + past participle of torquere to twist (see torque (n.)); the
plant so called for its pungent odor. Modern application to a South American trailing plant with
orange flowers first recorded 1704.


torment (n.)

c.1300, the inflicting of torture, also state of great suffering, pain, distress, from Old French
torment torture, pain, anguish, suffering distress (11c., Modern French tourment), from Latin
tormentum twisted cord, sling; clothes-press; instrument for hurling stones, also instrument of
torture, a rack, figuratively anguish, pain, torment, from torquere to twist (see torque (n.)).


torture (n.)

early 15c., contortion, twisting, distortion; a disorder characterized by contortion, from Old
French torture infliction of great pain; great pain, agony (12c.), and directly from Late Latin
tortura a twisting, writhing, in Medieval Latin pain inflicted by judicial or ecclesiastical
authority as a means of punishment or persuasion, from stem of Latin torquere to twist, turn, wind,
wring, distort (see torque (n.)). The meaning infliction of severe bodily pain as a means of
punishment or persuasion in English is from 1550s. The theory behind judicial torture was that a
guilty person could be made to confess, but an innocent one could not, by this means. Macaulay
writes that it was last inflicted in England in May 1640.


torch (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French torche torch, also handful of straw (for wiping or cleaning, hence French
torcher to wipe, wipe down), originally twisted thing, then torch formed of twisted tow dipped in
wax, probably from Vulgar Latin *torca, alteration of Late Latin torqua, from Latin torquere to
twist (see torque (n.)).    In Britain, also applied to the battery-driven version (in U.S., a
flashlight). To pass the torch is an ancient metaphor from the Greek torch-races (lampadedromia)
where the goal was to reach the finish line with the torch still burning. Torch-bearer leader of a
cause is from 1530s. Torch song is 1927 (My Melancholy Baby, performed by Tommy Lyman, is said to
have been the first so called), from carry a torch suffer an unrequited love (also 1927), Broadway
slang, but the sense is obscure.


