torrent (n.)

rapid stream, c.1600, from Middle French torrent (16c.) and directly from Latin torrentem
(nominative torrens) rushing, roaring (of streams), also a rushing stream, originally as an
adjective roaring, boiling, burning, parching, hot, inflamed, present participle of torrere to parch
(see terrain). Extension to any onrush (of words, feelings, etc.) first recorded 1640s.


torrential (adj.)

1849; see torrent + -ial. Perhaps by influence of French torrentiel. Related: Torrentially.


BitTorrent

peer-to-peer file sharing protocol, implemented in 2001, from bit (n.2) in the computing sense +
torrent.


Niagara

waterfall from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario, from a town name, perhaps from an Iroquoian language and
meaning a neck (between two bodies of water); general sense of a cataract, torrent is attested from
1841; meaning  'shower' of ringlets (true or false) in women's hair is from 1864, also known as
cataract curls.


lavish (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lavasse (n.) torrent of rain, deluge, from Old French lavache, from
laver to wash, from Latin lavare to wash (see lave). Related: Lavishly.


din (n.)

Old English dyne (n.), dynian (v.), from Proto-Germanic *duniz (cognates: Old Norse dynr, Danish
don, Middle Low German don noise), from PIE root *dwen- to make noise (cognates: Sanskrit dhuni
roaring, a torrent).


lava (n.)

1750, from Italian (Neapolitan or Calabrian dialect) lava torrent, stream, traditionally from Latin
lavare to wash (see lave). Originally applied in Italian to flash flood rivulets after downpours,
then to streams of molten rock from Vesuvius. Alternative etymology is from Latin labes a fall, from
labi to fall. Lava lamp is attested from 1965, also lava light (reg. U.S., 1968, as Lava Lite).


current (adj.)

c.1300, running, flowing, from Old French corant running, lively, eager, swift, present participle
of corre to run, from Latin currere to run, move quickly (of persons or things), from PIE *kers- to
run (cognates: Greek -khouros running, Lithuanian karsiu go quickly, Old Norse horskr swift, Old
Irish and Middle Welsh carr cart, wagon, Breton karr chariot, Welsh carrog torrent). Meaning
prevalent, generally accepted is from 1560s.


ravine (n.)

1760, deep gorge, from French ravin a gully (1680s, from Old French raviner to pillage, sweep down,
cascade), and from French ravine violent rush of water, gully worn by a torrent, from Old French
ravine violent rush of water, waterfall; avalanche; robbery, rapine, both ultimately from Latin
rapina act of robbery, plundering (see rapine); sense influenced by Latin rapidus rapid. Middle
English ravine meant booty, plunder, robbery from c.1350-1500. Compare ravening.


