toss (n.)

an act of throwing, 1630s, from toss (v.). Meaning a coin toss is from 1798.


toss-up (n.)

even matter, 1809, from earlier sense of a flipping of a coin to arrive at a decision (c.1700), from
verbal phrase, from toss (v.) + up (adv.).


tosser (n.)

term of contempt in British slang, by 1977, probably from slang toss off act of masturbation (1735).
Agent noun from toss (v.). Compare jerk (n.).


tosspot (n.)

heavy drinker, 1560s, from toss (v.) + pot (n.1).


toss (v.)

mid-15c., to lift or throw with a sudden movement, of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian
source (compare dialectal Norwegian tossa to strew, spread). Food preparation sense (with reference
to salad, etc.) is recorded from 1723. Intransitive sense be restless; throw oneself about is from
1550s. Related: Tossed; tossing.


shy (v.1)

to throw (a missile) with a jerk or toss, 1787, colloquial, of unknown origin and uncertain
connection to shy (adj.). Related: Shied; shying.


chuck (n.2)

slight blow under the chin, 1610s, from chuck (v.1). Meaning a toss, a throw is from 1862. Related:
Chucked; chucking.


seismo-

word-forming element meaning earthquake, from comb. form of Greek seismos a shaking, shock; an
earthquake, from seiein to shake, from PIE root *twei- to agitate, shake, toss.


blanket (v.)

c.1600, to cover with or as with a blanket; also to toss in a blanket (as punishment), from blanket
(n.). Related: Blanketed; blanketing.


scramble (v.)

1580s (intransitive), perhaps a nasalized variant of scrabble (v.), in its sense of to struggle, to
scrape quickly. Transitive sense to stir or toss together randomly is from 1822. Broadcasting sense
to make unintelligible is attested from 1927. Related: Scrambled; scrambling. Scrambled eggs first
recorded 1843.


catapult (n.)

1570s, from Middle French catapulte and directly from Latin catapulta war machine for throwing, from
Greek katapeltes, from kata against (see cata-) + base of pallein to toss, hurl (see pulse (n.1)).
As an airplane-launching device on an aircraft-carrier by 1927.


anabolic (adj.)

pertaining to the process of building up (especially in metabolism), 1876, from Greek anabole that
which is thrown up; a mound, from anaballein to throw or toss up, from ana up, upward (see ana-) +
ballein to throw (see ballistics).


vex (v.)

early 15c., from Old French vexer vex, harass (14c.), from Latin vexare to shake, jolt, toss
violently; figuratively attack, harass, trouble, annoy, from vexus, collateral form of vectus, past
participle of vehere to draw, carry (see vehicle). Related: Vexed; vexing.


Portland

in Portland cement, 1720, named by its inventor, English mason Joseph Aspdin, from resemblance of
the color to the stone of Portland peninsula on the coast of Dorsetshire. The place name is
literally land surrounding a harbor, Old English Portlanda. Portland, Maine, U.S.A., took its name
1786, for the place in England. Portland, Oregon, was said to have been named for the city in Maine,
which won the honor by a coin toss over Boston.


whittle (v.)

1550s, to cut thin shavings from (something) with a knife, from Middle English whittel a knife,
especially a large one (c.1400), variant of thwittle (late 14c.), from Old English &thorn;witan to
cut, from Proto-Germanic *thwit- (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;veita to hew), from PIE root *twei- to
agitate, shake, toss. Figurative sense is attested from 1746. Related: Whittled; whittling.


canvass (v.)

c.1500, from alternative spelling of canvas (n.) and probably meaning, originally, to toss or sift
in a canvas sheet, hence to shake out, examine carefully (1520s); to solicit votes (1550s). The
spelling with a double -s- dates from 16c. Compare Old French canabasser to examine carefully,
literally to sift through canvas. Related: Canvassed; canvassing. As a noun related to this,
attested from c.1600.


jet (v.)

early 15c., to prance, strut, swagger, from Middle French jeter to throw, thrust, from Late Latin
iectare, abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc., in place of Latin iactare toss about,
frequentative of iacere to throw, cast, from PIE root *ye- to do (cognates: Greek iemi, ienai to
send, throw; Hittite ijami I make). Meaning to sprout or spurt forth is from 1690s. Related: Jetted;
jetting.


ventilate (v.)

early 15c., to scatter, disperse (as the wind does), from Latin ventilatus, past participle of
ventilare to brandish, toss in the air, winnow, fan, agitate, set in motion, from ventulus a breeze,
diminutive of ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Original notion is of cleaning grain by tossing it in
the air and letting the wind blow away the chaff. Meaning supply a room with fresh air first
recorded 1743 (see ventilation). Formerly with diverse slang senses, including shoot (someone),
recorded from 1875. Related: Ventilated; ventilating.


tassel (n.)

c.1300, mantle fastener, from Old French tassel tassel, fringe, hem; a fastening, clasp (12c.,
Modern French tasseau), from Vulgar Latin *tassellus, said to be from Latin taxillus small die or
cube, a diminutive of talus knucklebone (used as a die in gaming), ankle (see talus (n.1)). But OED
finds this doubtful and calls attention to the variant form tossel and suggests association with
toss (v.). Meaning hanging bunch of small cords is first recorded late 14c.


hobble (v.)

c.1300, hoblen to rock back and forth, toss up and down, probably related to its Dutch cognate
hobbelen (which, however, is not recorded before late 15c.).    Meaning to walk lamely is from
c.1400. Transitive sense of tie the legs (of an animal) first recorded 1831, probably an alteration
of 16c. hopple, cognate with Flemish hoppelen to rock, jump, which also is related to Dutch
hobbelen. Sense of hamper, hinder is c.1870. Related: Hobbled; hobbling. The noun is 1727, from the
verb.


kite (n.)

bird of prey (Milvus ictinus), Old English cyta kind of hawk, probably imitative of its cries
(compare ciegan to call, German Kauz screech owl). The toy kite first so-called 1660s, from its way
of hovering in the air like a bird. The dismissive invitation to go fly a kite is attested by 1942,
American English, probably tracing to the popular song of the same name (lyrics by Johnny Burke),
sung by Bing Crosby in The Star Maker (1939):    Go fly a kite and tie your troubles to the tail
They'll be blown away by a merry gale,   Go fly a kite and toss your worries to the wind   And they
won't come back, they'll be too chagrined.


jettison (v.)

1848, from jettison (n.) act of throwing overboard to lighten a ship. This noun was an 18c. Marine
Insurance writers' restoration of the earlier form and original sense of the 15c. word that had
become jetsam, probably because jetsam had taken on a sense of things cast overboard and an
unambiguous word was needed for act of throwing overboard.    Middle English jetteson (n.) act of
throwing overboard is from Anglo-French getteson, from Old French getaison act of throwing (goods
overboard), especially to lighten a ship in distress, from Late Latin iactionem (nominative
iactatio) act of throwing, noun of action from past participle stem of iectare toss about (see jet
(v.)). Related: Jettisoned.


hustle (v.)

1680s, to shake to and fro (especially of money in a cap, as part of a game called hustle-cap),
metathesized from Dutch hutselen, husseln to shake, to toss, frequentative of hutsen, variant of
hotsen to shake. The stems hot-, hut- appear in a number of formations in both High and Low German
dialects, all implying a shaking movement [OED]. Related: Hustled; hustling. Meaning push roughly,
shove first recorded 1751. That of hurry, move quickly is from 1812.    The key-note and countersign
of life in these cities [of the U.S. West] is the word hustle. We have caught it in the East. but we
use it humorously, just as we once used the Southern word skedaddle, but out West the word hustle is
not only a serious term, it is the most serious in the language. [Julian Ralph, Our Great West,
N.Y., 1893]    Sense of to get in a quick, illegal manner is 1840 in American English; that of to
sell goods aggressively is 1887.


swing (v.)

Old English swingan beat, strike; scourge, flog; to rush, fling oneself (strong verb, past tense
swang, past participle swungen), from Proto-Germanic *swingan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
swingan, Old Frisian swinga, German schwingen to swing, swingle, oscillate), from PIE *sweng(w)- to
swing, turn, toss (perhaps Germanic only).    The meaning move freely back and forth is first
recorded 1540s. Transitive sense cause to oscillate is from 1550s. Sense of bring about, make happen
is from 1934. Sense of engage in promiscuous sex is from 1964; earlier, more generally, enjoy
oneself unconventionally (1957). Related: Swung; swinging. Swing-voter independent who often
determines the outcome of an election is from 1966.


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


call (v.)

Old English ceallian to call, shout, less common than clipian; replaced by related Old Norse kalla
to cry loudly, from Proto-Germanic *kall- (cognates: Dutch kallen to talk, Old High German kallon to
call), from PIE root *gal- (2) to call, scream, shriek, shout (cognates: Sanskrit garhati bewail,
criticize; Latin gallus cock; Old High German klaga, German Klage complaint, grievance, lament,
accusation; Old English clacu affront; Old Church Slavonic glasu voice, glagolu word; Welsh galw
call). Related: Called; calling.    Meaning to give a name to is mid-13c. Coin-toss sense is from
1801. Meaning to visit (Middle English) was literally to stand at the door and call.
Telephone/telegraph sense is from 1889. To call out someone to fight (1823) corresponds to French
provoquer. To call it a day is from 1834.


walk (v.)

travel on foot, c.1200, a merger of two verbs, 1. Old English wealcan to toss, roll, move round
(past tense weolc, past participle wealcen), and 2. wealcian to roll up, curl, from Proto-Germanic
*welk- (cognates: Old Norse valka to drag about, Danish valke to full (cloth), Middle Dutch walken
to knead, press, full (cloth), Old High German walchan to knead, German walken to full), perhaps
ultimately from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, roll (see volvox).    The shift in sense is perhaps from
a colloquial use of the Old English word or via the sense of to full cloth (by treading on it),
though this sense does not appear until after the change in meaning. In 13c. it is used of snakes
and the passage of time, and in 15c. of wheeled carts. Rarely is there so specific a word as NE
walk, clearly distinguished from both go and run [Buck]. Meaning to go away is recorded from mid-
15c. Transitive meaning to exercise a dog (or horse) is from late 15c.; meaning to escort (someone)
in a walk is from 1620s. Meaning move (a heavy object) by turning and shoving it in a manner
suggesting walking is by 1890. To walk it off, of an injury, etc., is from 1741. Related: Walked;
walking.


