touching (adj.)

affecting the emotions, c.1600, present participle adjective from touch (v.).


touching (prep.)

concerning, regarding, late 14c., from touch (v.), on model of French touchant.


contact (n.)

1620s, action of touching, from Latin contactus a touching, from past participle of contingere to
touch, seize, from com- together (see com-) + tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)).    Figurative
sense of connection, communication is from 1818. As a signal to the person about to spin an aircraft
propeller that the ignition is switched on, the word was in use by 1913. Contact lens is first
recorded 1888; short form contact is from 1961.


penetrating (adj.)

touching the feelings intensely, 1630s, figurative present participle adjective from penetrate (v.).


handling (n.)

Old English handlung action of touching or feeling, from handlian (see handle (v.)). Meaning way in
which something handles (especially a motor vehicle) is from 1962.


feeling (n.)

late 12c., act of touching, sense of touch, verbal noun from feel (v.). Meaning emotion is mid-14c.
Meaning what one feels (about something), opinion is from mid-15c. Meaning capacity to feel is from
1580s. Related: Feelingly.


contiguous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin contiguus near, touching, bordering upon, from root of contingere to touch upon
(see contact). Earlier form, now obsolete, was contiguate (mid-15c.).


contingent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French contingent or directly from Latin contingentem (nominative contingens)
happening, touching, present participle of contingere to touch (see contact). The noun is from
1540s, thing happening by chance; as a group forming part of a larger group from 1727.


kowtow (n.)

also kow-tow, 1804, from Chinese k'o-t'ou custom of touching the ground with the forehead to show
respect or submission, literally knock the head, from k'o knock, bump + t'ou head. The verb in the
figurative sense of act in an obsequious manner is from 1826. Related: Kowtowed; kowtowing.


contagion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contagion, from Latin contagionem (nominative contagio) a touching,
contact, contagion, related to contingere touch closely (see contact (n.)).


thixotropy (adj.)

1927, coined in German from Greek thixis touching (related to thinganein to touch, from PIE root
*dheigh- to form, build; see dough) + trope turning (see trope (n.)). Related: Thixotropic.


wapentake (n.)

division of certain English counties (equivalent to a hundred in other places), Old English
w&aelig;penget&aelig;c division of a riding, from Old Norse vapnatak, from vapna, genitive plural of
vapn weapon (see weapon) + tak a touching, a taking hold, a grasping, from taka to take, grasp, from
Proto-Germanic *tak- (see take (v.)). Perhaps it originally was an armed muster with inspection of
weapons, or else an assembly where consent was expressed by brandishing swords and spears.


touch (n.)

c.1300, from Old French toche touch, a touching; a blow, attack; a test (Modern French touche), from
tocher to touch (see touch (v.)). Meaning slight attack (of an illness, etc.) is recorded from
1660s. Sense of communication (to be in or out of touch) is from 1884. Sense of skill or aptitude in
some topic is first recorded 1927, probably from music or the arts. Soft touch person easily
manipulated is recorded from 1940.


amusement (n.)

c.1600, diversion of attention, especially in military actions, from French amusement, noun of
action from amuser (see amuse).    And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching matters of
high nature, and all malicious and false Reports tending to Sedition, or to the Amusement of Our
People, are punishable ... (etc.) [Charles II, Proclamation of Oct. 26, 1688]  Meaning a pastime,
play, game, anything which pleasantly diverts the attention (from duty, work, etc.) is from 1670s,
originally depreciative; meaning pleasurable diversion attested from 1690s. Amusement hall is from
1862; amusement park first recorded 1897.


reach (v.)

Old English r&aelig;can, reccan reach out, stretch out, extend, hold forth, also succeed in
touching, succeed in striking; address, speak to, also offer, present, give, grant, from West
Germanic *raikjan stretch out the hand (cognates: Old Frisian reka, Middle Dutch reiken, Dutch
reiken, Old High German and German reichen), from Proto-Germanic *raikijanau, perhaps from PIE root
*reig- to stretch out (cognates: Sanskrit rjyati he stretches himself, riag torture (by racking);
Greek oregein to reach, extend; Lithuanian rai&#382;ius to stretch oneself; Old Irish rigim I
stretch).    Shakespeare uses the now-obsolete past tense form raught (Old English r&aelig;hte).
Meaning arrive at is early 14c.; that of succeed in influencing is from 1660s. Related: Reached;
reaching. Reach-me-down ready-made (of clothes) is recorded from 1862, from notion of being on the
rack in a finished state.


touch (v.)

late 13c., make deliberate physical contact with, from Old French tochier to touch, hit, knock;
mention, deal with (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare to knock, strike as a
bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative origin. Related: Touched;
touching.    From c.1300 in transitive sense bring into physical contact, also pertain to. Other
senses attested from 14c. are perceive by physical contact, examine by sense of touch, also be or
come into physical contact with; come to rest on; border on, be contiguous with; also use the sense
of touch, and mention, describe. From early 14c. as affect or move mentally or emotionally, with
notion of to touch the heart or mind. Also from early 14c. as have sexual contact with. Meaning to
get or borrow money first recorded 1760. Touch-and-go (adj.) is recorded from 1812, apparently from
the name of a tag-like game, first recorded 1650s. Touch football is first attested 1933. Touch-me-
not (1590s) translates Latin noli-me-tangere.


