touchstone (n.)

late 15c., from touch (v.) in the Middle English sense to test (metal) + stone (n.). Fine-grained
black quartz, used for testing the quality of gold and silver alloys by the color of the streak made
by rubbing them on it. Also see basalt. Figurative sense is from 1530s.


paragon (n.)

1540s, from Middle French paragon a model, pattern of excellence (15c., Modern French parangon),
from Italian paragone, originally touchstone to test gold (early 14c.), from paragonare to test on a
touchstone, compare, from Greek parakonan to sharpen, whet, from para- on the side (see para- (1)) +
akone whetstone, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid).


basalt (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin basaltes, misspelling of Latin basanites very hard stone, from Greek
basanites a species of slate used to test gold, from basanos touchstone. Not connected with salt.
Said by Pliny [Historia, 36.58] to be an African word, perhaps Egyptian bauhan slate. Any hard, very
dark rock would do as a touchstone; the assayer compared the streak left by the alleged gold with
that of real gold or baser metals. Hence Greek basanizein to be put to the test, examined closely,
cross-examined, to be put to torture.


oat (n.)

Old English ate (plural atan) grain of the oat plant, wild oats, of uncertain origin, possibly from
Old Norse eitill nodule, denoting a single grain, of unknown origin. The English word has cognates
in Frisian and some Dutch dialects. Famously defined by Johnson as, A grain, which in England is
generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.    The usual Germanic name is
derived from Proto-Germanic *khabran (cognates: Old Norse hafri, Dutch haver, source of haversack).
Wild oats, crop that one will regret sowing, is first attested 1560s, in reference to the folly of
sowing these instead of good grain.That wilfull and vnruly age, which lacketh rypenes and
discretion, and (as wee saye) hath not sowed all theyr wyeld Oates. [Thomas Newton, Lemnie's
Touchstone of complexions, 1576]   <hr />   Fred Sanford: I still want to sow some wild oats!
Lamont Sanford: At your age, you don't have no wild oats, you got shredded wheat.  [Sanford and Son]
Hence, to feel (one's) oats be lively, 1831, originally American English.


