tractable (adj.)

manageable, early 15c., from Latin tractabilis that may be touched or handled, workable, tangible,
manageable, figuratively, pliant, from tractare to handle, manage (see treat (v.)). Related:
Tractability.


intractable (adj.)

c.1500, rough, stormy; 1540s, not manageable, from Latin intractabilis not to be handled,
unmanageable, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + tractabilis (see tractable). Related:
Intractably.


flexible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French flexible or directly from Latin flexibilis that may be bent, pliant,
flexible, yielding; figuratively tractable, inconstant, from flexus, past participle of flectere to
bend, of uncertain origin. Related: Flexibly.


amenable (adj.)

1590s, liable, from Anglo-French amenable, Middle French amener answerable (to the law), from
&agrave; to (see ad-) + mener to lead, from Latin minare to drive (cattle) with shouts, variant of
minari threaten (see menace (n.)). Sense of tractable is from 1803, from notion of disposed to
answer or submit to influence. Related: Amenably.


beard (n.)

Old English beard beard, from West Germanic *barthaz (cognates: Old Frisian berd, Middle Dutch
baert, Old High German bart, German bart), seemingly from PIE *bhardh-a- beard (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic brada, Lithuanian barzda, and perhaps Latin barba beard).    The Greek and Roman Churches
have long disputed about the beard. While the Romanists have at different times practised shaving,
the Greeks, on the contrary, have strenuously defended the cause of long beards. Leo III. (795 AD)
was the first shaved Pope. Pope Gregory IV., after the lapse of only 30 years, fulminated a Bull
against bearded priests. In the 12th century the prescription of the beard was extended to the
laity. Pope Honorius III. to disguise his disfigured lip, allowed his beard to grow. Henry I. of
England was so much moved by a sermon directed against his beard that he resigned it to the barber.
Frederick Barbarossa is said to have been equally tractable. [Tom Robinson, M.D., Beards, St.
James's Magazine, 1881]    Pubic hair sense is from 1600s (but ne&thorn;ir berd pubic hair is from
late 14c.); in the 1811 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, the phrase beard-splitter is defined as, A
man much given to wenching (see beaver).


