tract (n.1)

area, mid-15c., period or lapse of time, from Latin tractus track, course, space, duration, lit, a
drawing out or pulling, from stem of trahere to pull, draw, from PIE root *tragh- to draw, drag,
move (cognates: Slovenian trag trace, track, Middle Irish tragud ebb; perhaps with a variant form
*dhragh-; see drag (v.)). The meaning stretch of land or water is first recorded 1550s. Specific
U.S. sense of plot of land for development is recorded from 1912; tract housing attested from 1953.


tract (n.2)

little book, treatise mid-12c., probably a shortened form of Latin tractatus a handling, treatise,
treatment, from tractare to handle (see treat (v.)). Related: Tractarian.


traction (n.)

early 15c., a drawing or pulling (originally the pulling of a dislocated limb to reposition it),
from Medieval Latin tractionem (nominative tractio) a drawing (mid-13c.), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Sense of rolling friction of a
vehicle first appears 1825. In modern medical care, a sustained pull to a part of the body to hold
fractured bones in position, 1885.


tractor (n.)

1856, something that pulls, from Modern Latin tractor that which draws, agent noun from past
participle stem of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Earlier used of a quack device
consisting of two metal rods which were supposed to relieve rheumatism (1798, in full Perkins's
metallic tractor); still the main sense in Century Dictionary (1891).    Sense of an engine or
vehicle for pulling wagons or plows is recorded by 1896, from earlier traction engine (1859). The
meaning powerful truck for pulling a freight trailer is first found 1926; tractor-trailer as
combined motor-truck and trailer is from 1914.


trait (n.)

late 15c., shot, missiles; later a stroke in drawing, a short line (1580s), from Middle French trait
line, stroke, feature, tract, from Latin tractus drawing, drawing out, dragging, pulling, later line
drawn, feature, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Sense of
particular feature, distinguishing quality in English is first recorded 1752.


dene (n.2)

bare, sandy tract by the sea, late 13c., of uncertain origin, perhaps connected to dune, but the
sense difference is difficult.


Levittown

used figuratively for generic suburban tract housing, American English, from the vast planned real
estate developments built by the firm Levitt &amp; Sons Inc., the first on Long Island, 1946-51
(more than 17,000 homes), the second north of Philadelphia (1951-55).


slash (n.)

a cutting stroke with a weapon, 1570s, from slash (v.); sense of slit in a garment is from 1610s;
that of open tract in a forest is first attested 1825, American English. As a punctuation mark in
writing or printing, it is recorded from 1961.


flats (n.)

level tidal tract, 1540s, from flat (n.) level piece of ground (late 12c.), from flat (adj.).


countryside (n.)

mid-15c., literally one side of a country (a valley, a mountain range, etc.), from country + side
(n.); hence, any tract of land having a natural unity (1727).


settlement (n.)

1620s, act of fixing or steadying; from settle (v.) + -ment. Meaning a colony, especially a new one,
tract of country newly developed is attested from 1690s; that of small village on the frontier is
from 1827, American English. Sense of payment of an account is from 1729; legal sense a settling of
arrangements (of divorce, property transfer, etc.) is from 1670s.


savannah (n.)

also savanna, treeless plain, 1550s, from Spanish sabana, earlier zavana treeless plain, from Taino
(Arawakan) zabana. In U.S. use, especially in Florida, a tract of low-lying marshy ground (1670s).


survey (v.)

c.1400, to consider, contemplate, from Anglo-French surveier, Old French sorveoir look (down) at,
look upon, notice; guard, watch, from Medieval Latin supervidere oversee (see supervise). Meaning
examine the condition of is from mid-15c. That of to take linear measurements of a tract of ground
is recorded from 1540s. Related: Surveyed; surveying; surveyance (late 14c.).


trattoria (n.)

Italian restaurant, 1832, from Italian trattoria, from trattore host, keeper of an eating house,
from trattare to treat, from Latin tractare, frequentative of trahere (past participle tractus) to
draw (see tract (n.1)).


trace (n.2)

straps or chains by which an animal pulls a vehicle, c.1300, from earlier collective plural trays,
from Old French traiz, plural of trait strap for harnessing, act of drawing, from Latin tractus a
drawing, track, from stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Related: Traces.


basin (n.)

large shallow vessel or dish, c.1200, from Old French bacin (11c., Modern French bassin), from
Vulgar Latin *baccinum, from *bacca water vessel, perhaps originally Gaulish. Meaning large-scale
artificial water-holding landscape feature is from 1712. Geological sense of tract of country
drained by one river or draining into one sea is from 1830.


Midgard

in Germanic cosmology, world inhabited by men (opposed to Asgard, the abode of the gods), 1882, from
Old Norse mi&eth;gar&eth;r, from mi&eth; mid (see mid) + Proto-Germanic *gardoz enclosure, tract
(see yard (n.1)). The Old English cognate was middangeard, which later was folk-etymologized as
middle earth (late 13c.).


district (n.)

1610s, territory under the jurisdiction of a lord or officer, from French district (16c.), from
Medieval Latin districtus restraining of offenders, jurisdiction, then under the feudal system area
of jurisdiction, noun use of past participle of Latin distringere hinder, detain (see distress).
Used vaguely of any tract of land from 1712. District attorney attested by 1789, American English.


detraction (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French detraccion detraction, disparagement, denigration, from Latin detractionem
(nominative detractio) a drawing off, from past participle stem of detrahere take down, pull down,
disparage, from de- down (see de-) + trahere to pull (see tract (n.1)). The fem. form detractress is
attested from 1716.


distract (v.)

mid-14c., to draw asunder or apart, to turn aside (literal and figurative), from Latin distractus,
past participle of distrahere draw in different directions, from dis- away (see dis-) + trahere to
draw (see tract (n.1)).    Sense of to throw into a state of mind in which one knows not how to act
is from 1580s. Related: Distracted; distracting; distractedly; distractedness.


backwood (n.)

1709, American English, from back (adj.) + wood (n.) forested tract. Also backwoods. As an
adjective, from 1784.    BACKWOODSMEN ... This word is commonly used as a term of reproach (and
that, only in a familiar style,) to designate those people, who, being at a distance from the sea
and entirely agricultural, are considered as either hostile or indifferent to the interests of the
commercial states. [John Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which Have Been
Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]


extract (v.)

late 15c., from Latin extractus, past participle of extrahere draw out, from ex- out (see ex-) +
trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). Related: Extracted; extracting.


contract (n.)

early 14c., from Old French contract (Modern French contrat), from Latin contractus a contract,
agreement, from past participle of contrahere to draw together, metaphorically, to make a bargain,
from com- together (see com-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). U.S. underworld sense of
arrangement to kill someone first recorded 1940.


reservation (n.)

late 14c., act of reserving, from Old French reservation (14c.) and directly from Late Latin
reservationem (nominative reservatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin reservare
(see reserve (n.)). Mental sense is from c.1600. U.S. sense tract of public land set aside for some
special use is recorded from 1789, originally in reference to the Six Nations in New York State.
Meaning act or fact of engaging a room, a seat, etc. is from 1904, originally American English.


retraction (n.)

late 14c., withdrawal of an opinion, from Latin retractionem (nominative retractio) a drawing back,
hesitation, refusal, noun of action from past participle stem of retractare revoke, cancel, from re-
back (see re-) + tractere draw violently, frequentative of trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)).
Originally the title of a book by St. Augustine correcting his former writings. Meaning recantation
of opinion with admission of error is from 1540s.


trail (v.)

c.1300, to hang down loosely and flow behind (of a gown, sleeve, etc.), from Old French trailler to
tow; pick up the scent of a quarry, ultimately from Vulgar Latin *tragulare to drag, from Latin
tragula dragnet, javelin thrown by a strap, probably related to trahere to pull (see tract (n.1)).
Transitive sense of to tow or pull along the ground is from c.1400. The meaning follow the trail of
(an animal, etc.) is first recorded late 14c. Meaning to lag behind is from 1957. Related: Trailed;
trailing.


subtraction (n.)

c.1400, withdrawal, removal, from Late Latin subtractionem (nominative subtractio) a drawing back,
taking away, from past participle stem of Latin subtrahere take away, draw off, draw from below,
from sub from under (see sub-) + trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). The mathematical sense is
attested from early 15c.  &THORN;ou most know &thorn;at subtraccion is drawynge of one nowmber oute
of ano&thorn;er nomber. [The Crafte of Nombrynge, c.1425]


region (n.)

c.1300, tract of land of a considerable but indefinite extent, from Anglo-French regioun, Old French
region land, region, province (12c.), from Latin regionem (nominative regio) a district, portion of
a country, territory, district; a direction, line; boundary line, limit, noun of state from past
participle stem of regere to direct, rule (see regal). Phrase in the region of about (of numbers,
etc.) is recorded from 1961.


attract (v.)

early 15c., from Latin attractus, past participle of attrahere to draw, pull; to attract, from ad-
to (see ad-) + trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Originally a medical term for the body's tendency
to absorb fluids, nourishment, etc., or for a poultice treatment to draw out diseased matter
(1560s). Of the ability of people or animals to draw others to them, it is attested from 1560s; of
physical forces (magnetism, etc.), from c.1600 (implied in attraction). Related: Attracted;
attracting.


retreat (n.)

c.1300, a step backward; late 14c., act of retiring or withdrawing; military signal for retiring
from action or exercise, from Old French retret, noun use of past participle of retrere draw back,
from Latin retrahere draw back, withdraw, call back, from re- back (see re-) + trahere to draw (see
tract (n.1)). Meaning place of seclusion is from early 15c.; sense of establishment for mentally ill
persons is from 1797. Meaning period of retirement for religious self-examination is from 1756.


plateau (n.)

1796, elevated tract of relatively level land, from French plateau table-land, from Old French
platel (12c.) flat piece of metal, wood, etc., diminutive of plat flat surface or thing, noun use of
adjective plat flat, stretched out (12c.), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *plattus, from Greek platys
flat, wide, broad (see plaice). Meaning stage at which no progress is apparent is attested from
1897, originally in psychology of learning. In reference to sexual stimulation from 1960.


landscape (n.)

c.1600, painting representing natural scenery, from Dutch landschap, from Middle Dutch landscap
region, from land land (see land) + -scap -ship, condition (see -ship). Originally introduced as a
painters' term. Old English had cognate landscipe, and compare similarly formed Old High German
lantscaf, German Landschaft, Old Norse landskapr. Meaning tract of land with its distinguishing
characteristics is from 1886.


morass (n.)

wet, swampy tract, 1650s, from Dutch moeras marsh, fen, from Middle Dutch marasch, from Old French
marais marsh, from Frankish, possibly from West Germanic *marisk, from Proto-Germanic *mariskaz like
a lake, from *mari sea (see mere (n.)). The word was influenced in Dutch by moer moor (see moor
(n.)). Figurative use is attested from 1867. Replaced earlier mareis (early 14c.; see marish).


heath (n.)

Old English h&aelig;&eth; untilled land, tract of wasteland, earlier heather, influenced by Old
Norse hei&eth;r field, from Proto-Germanic *haithiz (cognates: Old Saxon hetha, Old High German
heida heather, Dutch heide heath, Gothic hai&thorn;i field), from PIE *kaito forest, uncultivated
land (cognates: Old Irish ciad, Welsh coed, Breton coet wood, forest).


protraction (n.)

mid-15c., drawing or writing of numbers, from Middle French protraction (15c.) and directly from
Late Latin protractionem (nominative protractio) a drawing out or lengthening, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin protrahere to draw forward, draw out, bring forth; figuratively bring
to light, reveal, expose, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning
act of drawing out or prolonging is from 1530s.


prairie (n.)

tract of level or undulating grassland in North America, by 1773, from French prairie meadow,
grassland, from Old French praerie meadow, pastureland (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *prataria, from
Latin pratum meadow, originally a hollow. The word existed in Middle English as prayere, but was
lost and reborrowed to describe the American plains. Prairie dog is attested from 1774; prairie
schooner immigrant's wagon is from 1841. Illinois has been the Prairie State since at least 1861. In
Latin, Neptunia prata was poetic for the sea.


portray (v.)

mid-13c., to draw, paint (something), from Anglo-French purtraire, Old French portraire to draw, to
paint, portray (12c.), literally trace, draw forth, from por- forth (from Latin pro-; see pro-) +
traire trace, draw, from Latin trahere to drag, draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning depict in words,
describe is from late 14c. Related: Portrayed; portraying.


Carolina

1663, North American colony named for King Charles II (the Latin form of the male proper name is
Carolus). Earlier French colonists called the region Caroline (1564) in honor of Charles IX, King of
France. A 1629 grant here by Charles I of England was named Carolana. The original site of the name
is modern South Carolina and the tract originally included North Carolina and Georgia; North
Carolina first used 1691, in reference to settlements made from Virginia. The official division into
north and south dates from 1710. Used generically in forming species names in botany and zoology
from 1734.


treat (v.)

c.1300, negotiate, bargain, deal with, from Old French traitier deal with, act toward; set forth (in
speech or writing) (12c.), from Latin tractare manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward,
originally drag about, tug, haul, pull violently, frequentative of trahere (past participle tractus)
to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning to entertain with food and drink without expense to the
recipient by way of compliment or kindness (or bribery) is recorded from c.1500. Sense of deal with,
handle, or develop in speech or writing (early 14c.) led to the use in medicine to attempt to heal
or cure, to manage in the application of remedies (1781). Related: Treated; treating.


farm (n.)

c.1300, fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent, from Old French
ferme rent, lease, from Medieval Latin firma fixed payment, from Latin firmare to fix, settle,
confirm, strengthen, from firmus firm (see firm (adj.)).    Sense of tract of leased land is first
recorded early 14c.; that of cultivated land (leased or not) is 1520s. Phrase buy the farm die in
battle, is at least from World War II, perhaps a cynical reference to the draftee's dream of getting
out of the war and going home, in many cases to a peaceful farmstead. But fetch the farm is prisoner
slang from at least 1879 for get sent to the infirmary, with reference to the better diet and
lighter duties there.


Jehovah

1530, Tyndale's erroneous transliteration of Hebrew Tetragramaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai
my lord (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in
the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation lord would have been inconvenient; taken as
the principal and personal name of God.    The vowel substitution was originally made by the
Masoretes as a direction to substitute Adhonai for the ineffable name. European students of Hebrew
took this literally, which yielded Latin JeHoVa (first attested in writings of Galatinus, confessor
to Leo X, 1516). Jehovah's Witnesses member of Watchtower Bible and Tract Society first attested
1933; the organization founded c.1879 by Charles Taze Russell (1852-1916); the name from Isa.
xliii:10.


train (n.)

early 14c., a drawing out, delay; late 14c., trailing part of a skirt, gown, or cloak; also retinue,
procession, from Old French train tracks, path, trail (of a rome or gown); act of dragging, from
trainer to pull, drag, draw, from Vulgar Latin *traginare, extended from *tragere to pull, back-
formation from tractus, past participle of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).,
General sense of series, progression, succession, continuous course is from late 15c. Train of
thought first attested 1650s. The railroad sense locomotive and the cars coupled to it is recorded
from 1820 (publication year, dated 1816), from notion of a train of wagons or carriages pulled by a
mechanical engine.


trace (v.)

late 14c., follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something, also figurative; ponder,
investigate, from Old French tracier look for, follow, pursue (12c., Modern French tracer), from
Vulgar Latin *tractiare delineate, score, trace (source also of Spanish trazar to trace, devise,
plan out, Italian tracciare to follow by foot), a frequentative form from Latin tractus track,
course, literally a drawing out, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract
(n.1)).    Meaning move along, pass over (a path, etc.) is attested from c.1400; that of track down,
follow the trail of is early 15c. Meaning copy a drawing on a transparent sheet laid over it is
recorded from 1762. Related: Traced; tracing.


terrain (n.)

1727, ground for training horses, from French terrain piece of earth, ground, land, from Old French
(12c.), from Vulgar Latin *terranum, from Latin terrenum land, ground, noun use of neuter of
terrenus of earth, earthly, from terra earth, land, literally dry land (as opposed to sea); from PIE
root *ters- to dry (cognates: Sanskrit tarsayati dries up, Avestan tarshu- dry, solid, Greek
teresesthai to become or be dry, Latin torrere dry up, parch, Gothic &thorn;aursus dry, barren, Old
High German thurri, German d&uuml;rr, Old English &thorn;yrre dry; Old English &thorn;urstig
thirsty). Meaning tract of country, considered with regard to its natural features first attested
1766.


territory (n.)

late 14c., land under the jurisdiction of a town, state, etc., probably from Latin territorium land
around a town, domain, district, from terra earth, land (see terrain) + -orium, suffix denoting
place (see -ory). Sense of any tract of land, district, region is first attested c.1600. Specific
U.S. sense of organized self-governing region not yet a state is from 1799. Of regions defended by
animals from 1774.    Since -torium is a productive suffix only after verbal stems, the rise of
terri-torium is unexplained [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic
Languages]. An alternative theory, somewhat supported by the vowels of the original Latin word,
suggests derivation from terrere to frighten (see terrible); thus territorium would mean a place
from which people are warned off.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


park (n.)

mid-13c., enclosed preserve for beasts of the chase, from Old French parc enclosed wood or heath
land used as a game preserve (12c.), probably ultimately from West Germanic *parruk enclosed tract
of land (cognates: Old English pearruc, root of paddock (n.2), Old High German pfarrih fencing
about, enclosure, German pferch fold for sheep, Dutch park).    Internal evidence suggests the West
Germanic word is pre-4c. and originally meant the fencing, not the place enclosed. Found also in
Medieval Latin as parricus enclosure, park (8c.), which likely is the direct source of the Old
French word, as well as Italian parco, Spanish parque, etc. Some claim the Medieval Latin word as
the source of the West Germanic, but the reverse seems more likely. Some later senses in English
represent later borrowings from French. OED discounts notion of a Celtic origin. Welsh parc, Gaelic
pairc are from English.    Meaning enclosed lot in or near a town, for public recreation is first
attested 1660s, originally in reference to London; the sense evolution is via royal parks in the
original, hunting sense being overrun by the growth of London and being opened to the public.
Applied to sporting fields in American English from 1867.    New York's Park Avenue as an adjective
meaning luxurious and fashionable (1956) was preceded in the same sense by London's Park Lane
(1880). As a surname, Parker keeper of a park is attested in English from mid-12c. As a vehicle
transmission gear, park (n.) is attested from 1949.


