trample (v.)

late 14c., to walk heavily, frequentative form of tramp (v.). Transitive sense beat down by
continuously treading on is from mid-15c. Related: Trampled; trampling. As a noun from c.1600.


trip (v.)

late 14c., tread or step lightly and nimbly, skip, dance, caper, from Old French triper jump around,
dance around, strike with the feet (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch trippen to
skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample, Low German trippeln, Frisian tripje, Dutch trappen, Old English
treppan to tread, trample) related to trap (n.).    The senses of to stumble (intransitive), strike
with the foot and cause to stumble (transitive) are from mid-15c. in English. Meaning to release (a
catch, lever, etc.) is recorded from 1897; trip-wire is attested from 1868. Related: Tripped;
tripping.


trampoline (n.)

1798, from Spanish trampolin springboard, and Italian trampolino, from trampoli stilts, from a
Germanic source (compare Low German trampeln trample) related to tramp (v.).


struggle (v.)

late 14c., of uncertain origin, probably a frequentative form (compare trample, scuffle), of
uncertain origin. Skeat suggests Old Norse strugr ill will; others suggest a connection to Dutch
struikelen, German straucheln to stumble. Related: Struggled; struggling.


catastrophe (n.)

1530s, reversal of what is expected (especially a fatal turning point in a drama), from Latin
catastropha, from Greek katastrophe an overturning; a sudden end, from katastrephein to overturn,
turn down, trample on; to come to an end, from kata down (see cata-) + strephein turn (see strophe).
Extension to sudden disaster is first recorded 1748.


foil (v.)

c.1300, foilen to spoil a trace or scent by running over it, irregularly from Old French fouler
trample, from Vulgar Latin *fullare to clean cloth (by treading on it), from Latin fullo one who
cleans cloth, fuller, of unknown origin.    Hence, to overthrow, defeat (1540s). Sense of frustrate
the efforts of first recorded 1560s. Related: Foiled; foiling. Foiled again! as a cry of defeat and
dismay is from at least 1847.


tread (v.)

Old English tredan to tread, step on, trample; traverse, pass over (class V strong verb; past tense
tr&aelig;d, past participle treden), from Proto-Germanic *tred- (cognates: Old Saxon tredan, Old
Frisian treda, Middle Dutch treden, Old High German tretan, German treten, Gothic trudan, Old Norse
tro&eth;a), from PIE *der- (1) assumed base of roots meaning 'to run, walk, step' [Watkins].
Related: Trod; treading.


march (v.)

to walk with regular tread, early 15c., from Middle French marcher to march, walk, from Old French
marchier to stride, march, originally to trample, tread underfoot, perhaps from Frankish *markon or
some other Germanic source related to obsolete Middle English march (n.) borderland (see march
(n.2)). Or possibly from Gallo-Roman *marcare, from Latin marcus hammer, via notion of tramping the
feet. Meaning to cause to march is from 1590s. Related: Marched; marching. Marching band is attested
from 1852. Italian marciare, Spanish marchar are said to be from French.


salient (adj.)

1560s, leaping, a heraldic term, from Latin salientem (nominative saliens), present participle of
salire to leap, from PIE root *sel- (4) to jump (cognates: Greek hallesthai to leap, Middle Irish
saltraim I trample, and probably Sanskrit ucchalati rises quickly).    It was used in Middle English
as an adjective meaning leaping, skipping. The meaning pointing outward (preserved in military
usage) is from 1680s; that of prominent, striking first recorded 1840, from salient point (1670s),
which refers to the heart of an embryo, which seems to leap, and translates Latin punctum saliens,
going back to Aristotle's writings. Hence, the starting point of anything.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


threshold (n.)

Old English &thorn;rescold, &thorn;&aelig;rscwold, &thorn;erxold, etc., door-sill, point of
entering, probably literally something to tread upon, with first element related to Old English
&thorn;rescan (see thresh), with its original sense of tread, trample. Second element of unknown
origin and much transformed in all the Germanic languages, suggesting its literal sense was lost
even in ancient times. In English it probably has been altered to conform to hold, but the oft-
repeated story that the threshold was a barrier placed at the doorway to hold the chaff flooring in
the room is mere folk etymology. Cognates include Old Norse &thorn;reskjoldr, Swedish tr&ouml;skel,
Old High German driscufli, German dialectal drischaufel. Figurative use was in Old English.


mare (n.3)

night-goblin, incubus, Old English mare incubus, nightmare, monster, from mera, m&aelig;re, from
Proto-Germanic *maron goblin (cognates: Middle Low German mar, Middle Dutch mare, Old High German
mara, German Mahr incubus, Old Norse mara nightmare, incubus), from PIE *mora- incubus (cognates:
first element in Old Irish Morrigain demoness of the corpses, literally queen of the nightmare, also
Bulgarian, Serbian mora, Czech mura, Polish zmora incubus; French cauchemar, with first element from
Old French caucher to trample), from root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid).


stamp (v.)

Old English stempan to pound in a mortar, from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stappa,
Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen to stamp with the
foot, beat, pound, German Stampfe pestle), from nasalized form of PIE root *stebh- to support, place
firmly on (cognates: Greek stembein to trample, misuse; see staff (n.)). The vowel altered in Middle
English, perhaps by influence of Scandinavian forms.    Sense of strike the foot forcibly downwards
is from mid-14c. The meaning impress or mark (something) with a die is first recorded 1550s. Italian
stampa stamp, impression, Spanish estampar to stamp, print, French &#233;tamper (13c., Old French
estamper) to stamp, impress are Germanic loan-words. Related: Stamped; stamping. To stamp out
originally was extinguish a fire by stamping on it; attested from 1851 in the figurative sense.
Stamping ground one's particular territory (1821) is from the notion of animals. A stamped addressed
envelope (1873) was one you enclosed in a letter to speed or elicit a reply.


