tramp (n.)

person who wanders about, idle vagrant, vagabond, 1660s, from tramp (v). Sense of steamship which
takes cargo wherever it can be traded (as opposed to one running a regular line) is attested from
c.1880. The meaning promiscuous woman is from 1922. Sense of a long, toilsome walk is from 1786.


tramp (v.)

late 14c., walk heavily, stamp, from Middle Low German trampen to stamp, from Proto-Germanic *tremp-
(cognates: Danish trampe, Swedish trampa to tramp, stamp, Gothic ana-trimpan to press upon), from
PIE *der- (1) to run, walk, step (see tread (v.)). Related: Tramped; tramping.


trample (v.)

late 14c., to walk heavily, frequentative form of tramp (v.). Transitive sense beat down by
continuously treading on is from mid-15c. Related: Trampled; trampling. As a noun from c.1600.


trampoline (n.)

1798, from Spanish trampolin springboard, and Italian trampolino, from trampoli stilts, from a
Germanic source (compare Low German trampeln trample) related to tramp (v.).


paddle (v.1)

to dabble, wade in water, 1520s, probably cognate with Low German paddeln tramp about, frequentative
of padjen to tramp, to run in short steps, from pad (v.). Related: Paddled; paddling. Meaning to
move in water by means of paddles is a different word (see paddle (v.3)).


traipse (v.)

1590s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French trepasser pass over or beyond, from Old
French trespasser cross, traverse, transgress (see trespass). Or from a source related to Middle
Dutch trappen, dialectal Norwegian trappa to tread, stamp (see trap (n.)). Liberman points out that
it resembles German traben tramp and other similar verbs meaning 'tramp; wander; flee' in several
European languages. They seem to have been part of soldiers' and vagabonds' slang between 1400 and
1700. In all likelihood, they originated as onomatopoeias and spread to neighboring languages from
Low German. Related: Traipsed; traipsing.


prushun (n.)

1893, boy who travels with a tramp and begs for him, of unknown origin; his protector/owner was a
jocker.


yegg (n.)

also yegg-man, 1901, a word popular in the first decade of the 20th century and meaning vaguely hobo
burglar; safe-breaker; criminal beggar.    The great majority [of the Chicago criminal population]
are what certain detectives call Yegg-men, which is a term, by the way, that the detectives would do
well to define. As far as I can discover it means tramp-thieves, but the average tramp seldom uses
the word. Hoboes that break safes in country post-offices come under the Yegg-men classification.
[McClure's Magazine, Feb. 1901]    Popularized by the Pinkerton agency detectives. The 1900
Proceedings of the 26th annual convention of the American Bankers' Association, whose members were
protected by the Pinkerton's National Detective Agency, reported a letter dated Nov. 23 or 24, 1899,
returning $540, taken earlier that year, to the Scandinavian-American Bank of St. Paul, Minn.,
noting that the thieves had been so hounded by detectives that they gave up the gains and advised
the bank to advertise that it was a member of the American Bankers Association, because the American
Bankers Association is too tough for poor 'grafters.' The letter supposedly was signed John Yegg,
but this was said to be a pseudonym and the report identified the man arrested later in the case as
William Barrett.


tromp (v.)

1892, variant of tramp (v.); mainly American English. Related: Tromped; tromping.


bindle (n.)

tramp's bundle, c.1900, perhaps from bundle (n.) or Scottish dialectal bindle cord or rope to bind
things. Related: Bindlestiff.


piker (n.)

miserly person, 1872, formerly poor migrant to California (1860), earlier pike (1854), perhaps
originally vagrant who wanders the pike (n.1) (which is the notion in Sussex dialectal piker
vagrant, tramp, gypsy, 1838), but Barnhart, OED and others suggest the American English word
ultimately is a reference to people from Pike County, Missouri.


dingbat (n.)

1838, American English, some kind of alcoholic drink, of unknown origin. One of that class of words
(such as dingus, doohickey, gadget, gizmo, thingumabob) which are conjured up to supply names for
items whose proper names are unknown or not recollected. Used at various periods for money, a
professional tramp, a muffin, a typographical ornament, male genitalia, a Chinese, an Italian, a
woman who is neither your sister nor your mother, and a foolish person in authority. Popularized in
sense of foolish person by U.S. TV show All in the Family (1971-79), though this usage dates from
1905.


palliard (n.)

late 15c., vagabond or beggar (who sleeps on straw in barns), from Middle French paillard, from Old
French paillart tramp, beggar, vagabond (13c.), from paille straw (see pallet (n.1); also see -ard).


bum (n.2)

dissolute loafer, tramp, 1864, American English, from bummer loafer, idle person (1855), probably
from German slang bummler loafer, from bummeln go slowly, waste time. Bum first appears in a German-
American context, and bummer was popular in the slang of the North's army in the American Civil War
(as many as 216,000 German immigrants in the ranks). Bum's rush forcible ejection first recorded
1910.


patrol (n.)

1660s, action of going the rounds (of a military camp, etc.), from French patrouille a night watch
(1530s), from patrouiller go the rounds to watch or guard, originally tramp through the mud,
probably soldiers' slang, from Old French patouiller paddle in water, probably from pate paw, foot
(see patten). Compare paddlefoot, World War II U.S. Army slang for infantry soldier. Meaning those
who go on a patrol is from 1660s. Sense of detachment of soldiers sent out to scout the countryside,
the enemy, etc. is attested from 1702.


harlot (n.)

c.1200 (late 12c. in surnames), vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue, from Old French
herlot, arlot vagabond, tramp (usually male in Middle English and Old French), with forms in Old
Proven&ccedil;al (arlot), Old Spanish (arlote), and Italian (arlotto); of unknown origin. Used in
both positive and pejorative senses by Chaucer; applied in Middle English to jesters, buffoons,
jugglers, later to actors. Sense of prostitute, unchaste woman probably had developed by 14c.,
certainly by early 15c., but this was reinforced by use as euphemism for strumpet, whore in 16c.
translations of the Bible. The word may be Germanic, with an original sense of camp follower, if the
first element is hari army, as some suspect.


fruit (n.)

late 12c., from Old French fruit fruit, fruit eaten as dessert; harvest; virtuous action (12c.),
from Latin fructus an enjoyment, delight, satisfaction; proceeds, produce, fruit, crops, from frug-,
stem of frui to use, enjoy, from PIE *bhrug- agricultural produce, also to enjoy (see brook (v.)).
Classical sense preserved in fruits of one's labor. Originally in English meaning vegetables as
well. Modern narrower sense is from early 13c. Meaning odd person, eccentric is from 1910; that of
male homosexual is from 1935. The term also is noted in 1931 as tramp slang for a girl or woman
willing to oblige, probably from the fact of being easy picking. Fruit salad recorded from 1861.


vagrant (n.)

mid-15c., person who lacks regular employment, one without fixed abode, a tramp, probably from
Anglo-French vageraunt, also wacrant, walcrant, which is said in many sources to be a noun use of
the past participle of Old French walcrer to wander, from Frankish (Germanic) *walken, from the same
source as Old Norse valka wander and English walk (v.).    Under this theory the word was influenced
by Old French vagant, vagaunt wandering, from Latin vagantem (nominative vagans), past participle of
vagari to wander, stroll about (see vagary). But on another theory the Anglo-French word ultimately
is from Old French vagant, with an intrusive -r-. Middle English also had vagaunt wandering, without
fixed abode (late 14c.), from Old French vagant.


gunsel (n.)

1914, American English, from hobo slang, a catamite; specifically a young male kept as a sexual
companion, especially by an older tramp, from Yiddish genzel, from German G&auml;nslein gosling,
young goose. The secondary, non-sexual meaning young hoodlum seems to be entirely traceable to
Dashiell Hammett, who sneaked it into The Maltese Falcon (1929) while warring with his editor over
the book's racy language.    Another thing, Spade repeated, glaring at the boy: Keep that gunsel
away from me while you're making up your mind. I'll kill him.    The context implies some connection
with gun and a sense of gunman, and evidently the editor bought it. The word was retained in the
script of the 1941 movie made from the book, so evidently the Motion Picture Production Code censors
didn't know it either.    The relationship between Kasper Gutman (Sidney Greenstreet) and his young
hit-man companion, Wilmer Cook (Elisha Cook, Jr.), is made fairly clear in the movie, but the overt
mention of sexual perversion would have been deleted if the censors hadn't made the same mistaken
assumption as Hammett's editor. [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989, p.184]


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


