transient (adj.)

c.1600, transitory, not durable, from Latin transientem (nominative transiens) passing over or away,
present participle of transire cross over, go over, pass over, hasten over, pass away, from trans-
across (see trans-) + ire to go (see ion). Meaning passing through a place without staying is from
1680s. The noun is first attested 1650s; specific sense of transient guest or boarder attested from
1857. Related: Transiently.


transitory (adj.)

passing without continuing, late 14c., from Old French transitoire ephemeral, transitory (12c.),
from Late Latin transitorius passing, transient, in classical Latin allowing passage through, from
transitus, past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient).


transeunt (adj.)

variant of transient (adj.), usually in a sense of operating beyond or outside itself (opposite of
immanent).


transience (n.)

1745, from transient + -ence. Related: Transiency (1650s).


transition (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin transitionem (nominative transitio) a going across or over, noun of action from
past participle stem of transire go or cross over (see transient).


transit (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin transitus, past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient).
Astronomical sense is from 1680s. Related: Transited; transiting.


transit (n.)

mid-15c., act or fact of passing across or through, from Latin transitus a going over, passing over,
passage, verbal noun from past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient). Meaning a
transit of a planet across the sun is from 1660s. Meaning public transportation is attested from
1873.


standing (adj.)

late 14c., at rest, motionless, also permanent, not transient, present participle adjective from
stand (v.). Meaning having an erect position, upright is from 1570s; that of done while standing is
from 1630s. The sense in standing army (c.1600) is permanent. Standing ovation is from 1902.


transitive (adj.)

taking a direct object (of verbs), 1570s (implied in transitively), from Late Latin transitivus
(Priscian) transitive, literally passing over (to another person), from transire go or cross over
(see transient). Related: Transitively.


trance (n.)

late 14c., state of extreme dread or suspense, also a half-conscious or insensible condition, state
of insensibility to mundane things, from Old French transe fear of coming evil, originally coma,
passage from life to death (12c.), from transir be numb with fear, originally die, pass on, from
Latin transire cross over (see transient). French trance in its modern sense has been reborrowed
from English.


Parnassus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Parnassos, mountain in central Greece, sacred to Apollo and the
Muses, thus symbolic of poetry. Room writes that the name is from Hittite parna abode. Related:
Parnassian.    Various kinds of literary fame seem destined to various measures of duration. Some
spread into exuberance with a very speedy growth, but soon wither and decay; some rise more slowly,
but last long. Parnassus has its flowers of transient fragrance, as well as its oaks of towering
height, and its laurels of eternal verdure. [Samuel Johnson, The Rambler, March 23, 1751]


beat (n.)

c.1300, a beating, whipping; the beating of a drum, from beat (v.). As throb of the heart from 1755.
Meaning regular route travelled by someone is attested from 1731, also a track made by animals
(1736), from the sense of the beat of the feet on the ground (late Old English), or perhaps that in
beat the bushes to flush game (c.1400), or beat the bounds (1560s). Extended to journalism by 1875.
Musical sense is by 1842, perhaps from the motion of the conductor and the notion of beating the
time:    It is usual, in beating the time of a piece of music, to mark or signalize the commencement
of every measure by a downward movement or beat of the hand, or of any other article that may be
used for the purpose .... [Godfrey Weber's General Music Teacher, 1842]    Earlier in music it meant
a sort of grace note:    BEAT, in music, a transient grace note, struck immediately before the note
it is intended to ornament. The beat always lies half a note beneath its principal, and should be
heard so closely upon it, that they may almost seem to be struck together. [The British
Encyclopedia, London, 1809]


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


