transitory (adj.)

passing without continuing, late 14c., from Old French transitoire ephemeral, transitory (12c.),
from Late Latin transitorius passing, transient, in classical Latin allowing passage through, from
transitus, past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient).


ephemeral (adj.)

1560s; see ephemera + -al (1). Related: Ephemerality. Originally of diseases and lifespans; extended
sense of transitory is from 1630s.


shadowy (adj.)

late 14c., shadewy, full of shadows, also transitory, fleeting, unreal; see shadow (n.) + -y (2).
From 1797 as faintly perceptible. Related: Shadowiness. Old English had sceadwig shady.


fugacious (adj.)

fleeing, likely to flee, 1630s, from Latin fugaci-, stem of fugax apt to flee, timid, figuratively
transitory, fleeting, from fugere to flee (see fugitive) + -ous. Related: Fugaciously;
fugaciousness.


volatile (adj.)

1590s fine or light, also evaporating rapidly (c.1600), from Middle French volatile, from Latin
volatilis fleeting, transitory; swift, rapid; flying, winged, from past participle stem of volare to
fly (see volant). Sense of readily changing, flighty, fickle is first recorded 1640s. Volatiles in
Middle English meant birds, butterflies, and other winged creatures (c.1300).


lucifugous (adj.)

shunning the light, 1650s, from Latin lucifugus, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)) +
stem of fugax apt to flee, timid, figuratively transitory, fleeting, from fugere to flee (see
fugitive).


ordinance (n.)

c.1300, an authoritative direction, decree, or command (narrower or more transitory than a law),
from Old French ordenance (Modern French ordonnance) or directly from Medieval Latin ordinantia,
from Latin ordinantem (nominative ordinans), present participle of ordinare put in order (see
ordain). By early 14c. senses had emerged of arrangement in ranks or rows (especially in order of
battle), also warlike provisions, equipment (a sense now in ordnance).


transient (adj.)

c.1600, transitory, not durable, from Latin transientem (nominative transiens) passing over or away,
present participle of transire cross over, go over, pass over, hasten over, pass away, from trans-
across (see trans-) + ire to go (see ion). Meaning passing through a place without staying is from
1680s. The noun is first attested 1650s; specific sense of transient guest or boarder attested from
1857. Related: Transiently.


ephemera (n.)

late 14c., originally a medical term, from Medieval Latin ephemera (febris) (fever) lasting a day,
from fem. of ephemerus, from Greek ephemeros lasting only one day, short-lived, from epi on (see
epi-) + hemerai, dative of hemera day, from PIE *amer- day.    Sense extended 17c. to short-lived
insects and flowers; general sense of thing of transitory existence is first attested 1751. Compare
Greek ephemeroi men, literally creatures of a day.


slide (v.)

Old English slidan (intransitive, past tense slad, past participle sliden) to glide, slip, fall,
fall down; figuratively fail, lapse morally, err; be transitory or unstable, from Proto-Germanic
*slidan to slip, slide (cognates: Old High German slito, German Schlitten sleigh, sled), from PIE
root *sleidh- to slide, slip (cognates: Lithuanian slystu to glide, slide, Old Church Slavonic sledu
track, Greek olisthos slipperiness, olisthanein to slip, Middle Irish sloet slide).    Meaning slip,
lose one's footing is from early 13c. Transitive sense from 1530s. Phrase let (something) slide let
it take its own course is in Chaucer (late 14c.). Sliding scale in reference to payments, etc., is
from 1842.


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


