transport (n.)

mid-15c., originally mental exaltation; sense of means of transportation, carriage, conveyance is
recorded from 1690s; from transport (v.).


transportation (n.)

1530s, act of transporting, noun of action from transport (v.). Middle English used verbal noun
transporting (early 15c.). In the sense of means of conveyance it is first recorded 1853.


transportable (adj.)

1580s, from transport (v.) + -able.


transport (v.)

late 14c., convey from one place to another, from Old French transporter carry or convey across;
overwhelm (emotionally) (14c.) or directly from Latin transportare carry over, take across, convey,
remove, from trans- across (see trans-) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Sense of carry away
with strong feelings is first recorded c.1500. Meaning to carry away into banishment is recorded
from 1660s.


vehicle (n.)

1610s, a medium through which a drug or medicine is administered, also any means of conveying or
transmitting, from French v&eacute;hicule (16c.), from Latin vehiculum means of transport, vehicle,
carriage, conveyance, from vehere to bear, carry, convey, from PIE *wegh- to go, transport in a
vehicle (cognates: Old English wegan to carry; Old Norse vegr, Old High German weg way; Middle Dutch
wagen wagon; see wagon). Sense of cart or other conveyance in English first recorded 1650s.


ferry (v.)

Old English ferian to carry, convey, bring, transport, from Proto-Germanic *farjan to ferry
(cognates: Old Frisian feria carry, transport, Old Norse ferja to pass over, to ferry, Gothic farjan
travel by boat), from PIE root *per- (2) to lead, pass over (see port (n.1)). Related to fare (v.).
Related: Ferried; ferries; ferrying.


travois (n.)

type of American Indian transport, 1847, said to be ultimately from a Canadian Indian pronunciation
of travail.


railway (n.)

1812 in modern sense, from rail (n.1) + way (n.). Earlier used of any sort of road on which rails
(originally wooden) were laid for easier transport (1776).


stock-car (n.)

racing car with a basic chassis of an ordinary commercially produced vehicle, 1914, American
English, from stock (n.2) + car. Earlier a railroad car used to transport livestock (1858).


Kilroy

U.S. military graffito character, 1945, said to be either Sgt. Francis J. Kilroy Jr., U.S. Army Air
Transport, whose friend or friends began writing his name everywhere as a prank; or war
materi&eacute;ls inspector James J. Kilroy of Quincy, Mass., who wrote Kilroy was here on everything
he checked.


bus (v.)

1838, to travel by omnibus, from bus (n.). Transitive meaning transport students to integrate
schools is from 1961, American English. Meaning clear tables in a restaurant is first attested 1913,
probably from the four-wheeled cart used to carry dishes. Related: Bused; busing.


shuttle (v.)

1550s, move rapidly to and fro, from shuttle (n.); sense of transport via a shuttle service is
recorded from 1930. Related: Shuttled; shuttling.


network (n.)

net-like arrangement of threads, wires, etc., 1550s, from net (n.) + work (n.). Extended sense of
any complex, interlocking system is from 1839 (originally in reference to transport by rivers,
canals, and railways). Meaning broadcasting system of multiple transmitters is from 1914; sense of
interconnected group of people is from 1947.


TWA

formed May 16, 1928, as Transcontinental Air Transport, merged 1930 with Western Air Express to form
Transcontinental and Western Air Inc. (TWA). Name changed to Trans World Airlines 1950, but the
moniker remained the same. Its last remnants were bought out by rival American Airlines in April
2001.


doolally (adj.)

insane, eccentric, British slang, by 1917 in the armed services and in full doolally tap (with Urdu
word for fever), from Deolali, near Bombay, India, which was a military camp (established 1861) with
a large barracks and a chief staging point for British troops on their way to or from India; the
reference is to men whose enlistments had expired who waited there impatiently for transport home.


teleport (v.)

1940, in reference to religious miracles, from tele- + ending from transport (v.). Related:
Teleported; teleporter; teleporting.


sled (v.)

transport on a sled, 1718; ride on a sled, 1780, from sled (n.). Related: Sledded; sledding.


commissary (n.)

mid-14c., one to whom special duty is entrusted by a higher power, from Medieval Latin commissarius,
from Latin commissus entrusted, past participle of committere (see commit). Originally
ecclesiastical; the military sense of official in charge of supply of food, stores, transport dates
to late 15c. Hence storeroom (1882) and dining room in a larger facility (1929, American English).


ship (v.)

c.1300, to send or transport (merchandise, people) by ship; to board a ship; to travel by ship,
sail, set sail, also figurative, from ship (n.). Old English scipian is attested only in the senses
take ship, embark; be furnished with a ship. Transferred to other means of conveyance (railroad,
etc.) from 1857, originally American English. Related: Shipped; shipping.


deport (v.2)

banish, 1640s, from French d&eacute;porter, from Latin deportare carry off, transport, banish,
exile, from de- in its sense of off, away (see de-) + portare to carry (but associated by folk
etymology with portus harbor); see port (n.1). Related: Deported; deporting.


Kiribati

island nation in the Pacific, formerly Gilbert Islands and named for Capt. Thomas Gilbert, who
arrived there 1788 after helping transport the first shipload of convicts to Australia. At
independence in 1979 it took the current name, which represents the local pronunciation of Gilbert.
Christmas Island, named for the date it was discovered by Europeans, is in the chain and now goes by
Kiritimati, likewise a local pronunciation of the English name.


convey (v.)

c.1300, to go along with; late 14c., to carry, transport; from Anglo-French conveier, from Old
French convoier to escort (Modern French convoyer), from Vulgar Latin *conviare to accompany on the
way, from Latin com- together (see com-) + via way, road (see via). It was a euphemism for steal
15c.-17c., which helped broaden its meaning. Related: Conveyed; conveying.


rapture (n.)

c.1600, act of carrying off, from Middle French rapture, from Medieval Latin raptura seizure, rape,
kidnapping, from Latin raptus a carrying off, abduction, snatching away; rape (see rapt). Earliest
attested use in English is of women and in 17c. it sometimes meant rape (v.), which word is a
cognate of this. Sense of spiritual ecstasy, state of mental transport first recorded c.1600
(raptures).


punt (n.2)

flat-bottomed river boat, late Old English punt, perhaps an ancient survival of British Latin ponto
flat-bottomed boat (see OED), a kind of Gallic transport (Caesar), also floating bridge (Gellius),
from Latin pontem (nominative pons) bridge (see pontoon). Or from or influenced by Old French
cognate pont large, flat boat.


sled (n.)

early 14c., a dragged vehicle used for transport of heavy goods, from Middle Dutch sledde sled, from
Proto-Germanic *slid- (cognates: Old Saxon slido, Old Norse sle&eth;i, Danish sl&aelig;de, Swedish
sl&auml;de, Old High German slito, German Schlitten sledge), from the same root as Old English
slidan (see slide (v.)). Not found in Old English. In reference to a sleigh used for travel or
recreation, it is attested from 1580s, now mainly American English.


smuggler (n.)

1660s, from Low German smuggeln or Dutch smokkelen to transport (goods) illegally, apparently a
frequentative formation of a word meaning to sneak (from Proto-Germanic *smuganan; cognates: Dutch
smuigen to eat secretly; Swedish smyg a lurking-hole, Danish smughandel contraband trade, Norwegian
smjuga, Old English smeogan to creep), perhaps literally to slip (contraband through), from Proto-
Germanic *(s)muk- (see smock).


ochlocracy (n.)

government by the rabble, 1580s, from French ochlocratie (1560s), from Greek okhlokratia (Polybius)
mob rule, the lowest grade of democracy, from kratos rule, power, strength (see -cracy) + okhlos
mob, populace, perhaps literally moving mass, from PIE *wogh-lo-, from root *wegh- to go, transport
in a vehicle (see weigh). For sense development, compare mob (n.). Related: Ochlocratic;
ochlocratical. Greek also had okhlagogos mob-leader, ochlagogue.


freight (n.)

early 13c., fraght, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German vracht, vrecht, meaning originally cost
of transport and probably from a lost Old Frisian word, from Proto-Germanic *fra-aihtiz absolute
possession, property (source also of Old High German freht earnings), from *fra-, intensive prefix,
+ *aik to be master of, possess, from PIE *aik- (see owe). Meaning transporting of goods or
passengers for money is from late 14c. Danish fragt, Swedish frakt apparently also are from Frisian.
As a verb, from late 14c.


carry (v.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French carier to transport in a vehicle or Old North French carrier to cart,
carry (Modern French charrier), from Gallo-Roman *carrizare, from Late Latin carricare, from Latin
carrum (see car).    Meaning take by force is from 1580s. Sense of gain victory in an election is
from 1610s. Of sound, to be heard at a distance by 1896. Carrying capacity is attested from 1836.
Carry on continue to advance is from 1640s; carryings-on questionable doings is from 1660s. Carry-
castle (1590s) was an old descriptive term for an elephant.


traduce (v.)

1530s, alter, change over, transport, from Latin traducere change over, convert, also lead in
parade, make a show of, dishonor, disgrace, originally lead along or across, bring through, transfer
(source also of French traduire, Spanish traducir, Italian tradurre), from trans- across (see
trans-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sense of defame, slander in English is from 1580s, from
Latin traducere in the sense of scorn or disgrace, a figurative use from the notion of to lead along
as a spectacle. Related: Traduced; traducing.


shift (v.)

Old English sciftan, scyftan arrange, place, order, also divide, partition; distribute, allot,
share, from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (cognates: Old Norse skipta to divide, change, separate, Old
Frisian skifta to decide, determine, test, Dutch schiften to divide, turn, German schichten to
classify, Schicht shift). This is said to be related to the source of Old English sceadan divide,
separate, (see shed (v.)).    c.1200 as to dispose; make ready; set in order, control, also
intransitive, take care of oneself. From c.1300 as to go, move, depart; move (someone or something),
transport. Sense of to alter, to change appeared mid-13c. (compare shiftless). Meaning change the
gear setting of an engine is from 1910; to shift gears in the figurative sense is from 1961.
Related: Shifted; shifting.


send (v.)

Old English sendan send, send forth; throw, impel, from Proto-Germanic *sandijan (cognates: Old
Saxon sendian, Old Norse and Old Frisian senda, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch senden, Dutch
zenden, German senden, Gothic sandjan), causative form of base *sin&thorn;an, denoting go, journey
(source of Old English si&eth; way, journey, Old Norse sinn, Gothic sin&thorn;s going, walk, time),
from PIE root *sent- to head for, go (cognates: Lithuanian siusti send; see sense (n.)).    Also
used in Old English of divine ordinance (as in godsend, from Old English sand messenger, message,
from Proto-Germanic *sandaz that which is sent). Slang sense of to transport with emotion, delight
is recorded from 1932, in American English jazz slang.


