transparent (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin transparentem (nominative transparens), present participle of
transparere show light through, from Latin trans- through (see trans-) + parere come in sight,
appear (see appear). Figurative sense of easily seen through is first attested 1590s. The attempt to
back-form a verb transpare (c.1600) died with the 17c. Related: Transparently.


transparency (n.)

1610s, condition of being transparent, from Medieval Latin transparentia, from transparentem (see
transparent). Meaning that which is transparent is from 1590s; of pictures, prints, etc., from 1785;
in photography from 1866. Related: Transparence.


pellucid (adj.)

transparent, translucent, 1610s, from Latin pellucidus transparent, from pellucere shine through,
from per- through (see per) + lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related: Pellucidly; pellucidity.


overlay (n.)

in the printing sense, 1824, from overlay (v.). Meaning transparent sheet over a map, chart, etc. is
from 1938. In earliest noun use it meant a necktie (1725).


hyalo-

word-forming element meaning of glass; glass-like, transparent, from Greek hyalos glass, clear
alabaster, apparently a non-Greek word, said to be of Egyptian origin.


Lucite

1937, proprietary name (E.I. DuPont de Nemours and Co., Wilmington, Delaware, U.S.) for a solid,
transparent plastic, from Latin luc(i)-, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


cellophane (n.)

1912, trademark name for a flexible, transparent product made from regenerated cellulose, coined by
the inventor, Swiss chemist Jacques E. Brandenberger (1872-1954), probably from cellulose +
connective o + -phane.


organdy (n.)

fine transparent muslin, 1829, from French organdi sorte de Mousseline ou toile de coton (1725), of
unknown origin. Barnhart suggests it is an alteration of Organzi, from medieval form of Urgench,
city in Uzbekistan that was a cotton textile center.


perspicuous (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin perspicuus transparent, clear, evident, from perspicere look through, look
closely at (see perspective). Related: Perspicuously; perspicuousness.


celluloid (n.)

transparent plastic made from nitro-celluloses and camphor, 1871, trademark name (reg. U.S.), a
hybrid coined by U.S. inventor John Wesley Hyatt (1837-1900) from cellulose + Greek-based suffix
-oid. Used figuratively for motion pictures from 1934. Abbreviated form cell sheet of celluloid is
from 1933 (see cel).


diaphanous (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin diaphanus, from Greek diaphanes transparent, from dia- through (see dia-)
+ phainesthai, middle voice form (subject acting on itself) of phainein to show (see phantasm).


talc (n.)

1580s, talke, from Middle French talc (16c.), probably from Spanish talco and Medieval Latin talcus,
also talcum talc (ealy 14c.), both from Arabic talq, from Persian talk talc. It was applied by the
Arab and medieval writers to various transparent, translucent and shining minerals such as talc
proper, mica, selenite, etc. [Flood]. Related: Talcoid; talcose; talcous.


negligee (n.)

1756, a kind of loose gown worn by women, from French n&eacute;glig&eacute;e, noun use of fem. past
participle of n&eacute;gligier to neglect (14c.), from Latin neglegere to disregard, not heed, not
trouble oneself about, also to make light of (see neglect (v.)). So called in comparison to the
elaborate costume of a fully dressed woman of the period. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1788] reports it vulgarly termed a neggledigee. Borrowed again, 1835; the modern sense semi-
transparent, flimsy, lacy dressing gown is yet another revival, first recorded 1930. It also was
used in the U.S. funeral industry mid-20c. for shroud of a corpse.


twenty (n.)

Old English twentig group of twenty, from twegen two (see two) + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)).
Cognate with Old Saxon twentig , Old Frisian twintich, Dutch twintig, Old High German zweinzug,
German zwanzig. Gothic twai tigjus is even more transparent: literally two tens.    The card game
twenty-one (1790) is from French vingt-et-un (1781). Twenty-twenty hindsight is first recorded 1962,
a figurative use of the Snellen fraction for normal visual acuity, expressed in feet. The guessing
game of twenty questions is recorded from 1786.


trace (v.)

late 14c., follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something, also figurative; ponder,
investigate, from Old French tracier look for, follow, pursue (12c., Modern French tracer), from
Vulgar Latin *tractiare delineate, score, trace (source also of Spanish trazar to trace, devise,
plan out, Italian tracciare to follow by foot), a frequentative form from Latin tractus track,
course, literally a drawing out, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract
(n.1)).    Meaning move along, pass over (a path, etc.) is attested from c.1400; that of track down,
follow the trail of is early 15c. Meaning copy a drawing on a transparent sheet laid over it is
recorded from 1762. Related: Traced; tracing.


tiffany (n.)

type of thin, transparent fabric, c.1600; earlier a common name for the festival of the Epiphany
(early 14c.; in Anglo-French from late 13c.), from Old French Tifinie, Tiphanie Epiphany (c.1200),
from Late Latin Theophania Theophany, another name for the Epiphany, from Greek theophania the
manifestation of a god (see theophany).    Also popular in Old French and Middle English as a name
given to girls born on Epiphany Day. The fabric sense is found only in English and is of obscure
origin and uncertain relation to the other meanings, unless holiday silk or as a fanciful or playful
allusion to manifestation:    The invention of that fine silke, Tiffanie, Sarcenet, and Cypres,
which instead of apparell to cover and hide, shew women naked through them. [Holland's Pliny, 1601]
The fashionable N.Y. jewelry firm Tiffany &amp; Co. (1895) is named for its founder, goldsmith
Charles L. Tiffany (1812-1902) and his son, Louis C. Tiffany (1848-1933), who was the art nouveau
decorator noted for his glassware. The surname is attested in English from 1206.


sphere (n.)

mid-15c., Latinized spelling of Middle English spere (c.1300) cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow
globe about the world, from Anglo-French espiere, Old French espere (13c., Modern French
sph&#232;re), from Latin sphaera globe, ball, celestial sphere (Medieval Latin spera), from Greek
sphaira globe, ball, playing ball, terrestrial globe, of unknown origin.    From late 14c. in
reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos
believed to revolve around the earth and contain the planets and the fixed stars; the supposed
harmonious sound they made rubbing against one another was the music of the spheres (late 14c.).
Also from late 14c. as a globe; object of spherical form, a ball, and the geometric sense solid
figure with all points equidistant from the center. Meaning range of something, place or scene of
activity is first recorded c.1600 (as in sphere of influence, 1885, originally in reference to
Anglo-German colonial rivalry in Africa).


spider (n.)

late 14c., spydyr, from earlier spi&#254;re, spi&#254;ur, spi&#254;er (14c.), from Old English
spi&#240;ra, from Proto-Germanic *spin-thron- (cognate with Danish spinder), literally the spinner,
from *spen-wo- to spin (see spin (v.)) + formative or agential *-thro. The connection with the root
is more transparent in other Germanic cognates (such as Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Middle High
German, German spinne, Dutch spin spider).    The male is commonly much smaller than the female, and
in impregnating the female runs great risk of being devoured. The difference in sizes is as if the
human female should be some 60 or 70 feet tall. [Century Dictionary]    Not the common word in Old
English, which identified the creatures as loppe, lobbe, also atorcoppe, and, from Latin, renge.
Another Old English word was gangewifre a weaver as he goes, and Middle English had araine spider
(14c.-15c., from French). In literature, often a figure of cunning, skill, and industry as well as
poisonous predation. As the name for a type of two-pack solitaire, it is attested from 1890. Spider
plant is from 1852; spider crab is from 1710, used of various species; spider monkey is from 1764,
so called for its long limbs.


-ty (1)

suffix representing ten in cardinal numbers that are multiples of 10 (sixty, seventy, etc.), from
Old English -tig, from a Germanic root (cognates: Old Saxon, Dutch -tig, Old Frisian -tich, Old
Norse -tigr, Old High German -zug, German -zig) that existed as a distinct word in Gothic (tigjus)
and Old Norse (tigir) meaning tens, decades. Compare tithe (n.).    English, like many other
Germanic languages, retains traces of a base-12 number system. The most obvious instance is eleven
and twelve which ought to be the first two numbers of the teens series. Their Old English forms,
enleofan and twel(eo)f(an), are more transparent: leave one and leave two.    Old English also had
hund endleofantig for 110 and hund twelftig for 120. One hundred was hund teantig. The -tig
formation ran through 12 cycles, and could have bequeathed us numbers *eleventy (110) and *twelfty
(120) had it endured, but already during the Anglo-Saxon period it was being obscured.    Old Norse
used hundra&eth; for 120 and &thorn;usend for 1,200. Tvauhundra&eth; was 240 and
&thorn;riuhundra&eth; was 360. Older Germanic legal texts distinguished a common hundred (100) from
a great hundred (120). This duodecimal system is perhaps due to contact with Babylonia [Lass, Old
English].


