transgression (n.)

late 14c., from Old French transgression transgression, particularly that relating to Adam and the
Fall (12c.), from Late Latin transgressionem (nominative transgressio) a transgression of the law,
in classical Latin, a going over, a going across, noun of action from transgressus, past participle
of transgredi step across, step over; climb over, pass, go beyond, from trans- across (see trans-) +
gradi (past participle gressus) to walk, go (see grade (n.)). Geological sense is from 1882.


forfeiture

mid-14c., from Old French forfaiture crime, transgression; penalty for committing a crime, from
forfait (see forfeit).


trespass (n.)

c.1300, a transgression, from Old French trespas, verbal noun from trespasser (see trespass (v.)).
Related: Trespasses.


transgress (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French transgresser (14c.), from Latin transgressus, past participle of
transgredi to step across, step over (see transgression). Related: Transgressed; transgressing.


lapse (n.)

mid-15c., elapsing of time, expiration; also temporary forfeiture of a legal right, from Middle
French laps lapse, from Latin lapsus a slipping and falling, flight (of time), falling into error,
from labi to slip, glide, fall. Meaning moral transgression, sin is c.1500; that of slip of the
memory is 1520s; that of a falling away from one's faith is from 1650s.


enormity (n.)

late 15c., transgression, crime, irregularity, from Old French &eacute;normit&eacute; extravagance,
enormity, atrocity, heinous sin, from Latin enormitatem (nominative enormitas) hugeness, vastness,
irregularity, from enormis (see enormous). Meaning extreme wickedness in English attested from
1560s; sense of hugeness (1792) is etymological but probably best avoided to prevent
misunderstanding.


transgressor (n.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French transgressour, Old French transgressor (14c.), and directly from Latin
transgressor, agent noun from transgredi (see transgression).


offense (n.)

late 14c., hurt, harm, injury, pain, from Old French ofense offense, insult, wrong (13c.) and
directly from Latin offensa an offense, injury, affront, crime, literally a striking against, noun
use of fem. past participle of offendere (see offend). Meaning action of attacking and feeling of
being hurt are both first recorded c.1400. Sense of breach of the law, transgression is first
recorded late 14c. Sporting sense first recorded 1894.


prevarication (n.)

late 14c., divergence from a right course, transgression, from Old French prevaricacion breaking of
God's laws, disobedience (to the Faith) (12c., Modern French pr&#233;varication) and directly from
Latin praevaricationem (nominative praevaricatio) duplicity, collusion, a stepping out of line (of
duty or behavior), noun of action from past participle stem of praevaricari to make a sham
accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly, in Church Latin, to transgress, from prae before (see
pre-) + varicare to straddle, from varicus straddling, from varus bowlegged, knock-kneed (see
varus). Meaning evasion, quibbling is attested from 1650s.


sin (n.)

Old English synn moral wrongdoing, injury, mischief, enmity, feud, guilt, crime, offense against
God, misdeed, from Proto-Germanic *sun(d)jo- sin (cognates: Old Saxon sundia, Old Frisian sende,
Middle Dutch sonde, Dutch zonde, German S&uuml;nde sin, transgression, trespass, offense, extended
forms), probably ultimately it is true, i.e. the sin is real (compare Gothic sonjis, Old Norse sannr
true), from PIE *snt-ya-, a collective form from *es-ont- becoming, present participle of root *es-
to be (see is).    The semantic development is via notion of to be truly the one (who is guilty), as
in Old Norse phrase ver&eth; sannr at be found guilty of, and the use of the phrase it is being in
Hittite confessional formula. The same process probably yielded the Latin word sons (genitive
sontis) guilty, criminal from present participle of sum, esse to be, that which is. Some
etymologists believe the Germanic word was an early borrowing directly from the Latin genitive. Also
see sooth.   Sin-eater is attested from 1680s. To live in sin cohabit without marriage is from 1838;
used earlier in a more general sense. Ice hockey slang sin bin penalty box is attested from 1950.


