transition (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin transitionem (nominative transitio) a going across or over, noun of action from
past participle stem of transire go or cross over (see transient).


transitional (adj.)

1810, from transition + -al (1). Related: Transitionally.


baleen (n.)

early 14c., whalebone, from Old French balaine (12c.) whale, whalebone, from Latin ballaena, from
Greek phallaina whale (apparently related to phallos swollen penis, probably because of a whale's
shape), from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Klein writes that the Greek to
Latin transition was through the medium of the Illyrian language, a fact which explains the
transition of Gk. -ph- into Latin -b- (instead of -p-).


metastasis (n.)

1570s, originally in rhetoric, from Late Latin metastasis transition, from Greek metastasis a
removing, removal; migration; a changing; change, revolution, from methistanai to remove, change,
from meta- over, across (see meta-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). A rhetorical term in Late Latin for a sudden transition in subjects, medical use
for shift of disease from one part of the body to another dates from 1660s in English. Related:
Metastatic.


Segway

trademark name (Segway Inc., Bedford, New Hampshire, U.S.), in use from 2001; according to the
company, chosen for similarity to segue on notion of a smooth transition from one place to another,
with probably influence of way (n.).


metabolic (adj.)

1845 in biological sense, from German metabolisch (1839), from Greek metabolikos changeable, from
metabole a change, changing, a transition (see metabolism). Used earlier in a general sense of
involving change (1743). Related: Metabolically.


segue (n.)

1740, an instruction in musical scores, from Italian segue, literally now follows, meaning to play
into the following movement without a break, third person singular of seguire to follow, from Latin
sequi to follow, from PIE *sekw- (1) to follow (see sequel). Extended noun sense of transition
without a break is from 1937; the verb in this sense is first recorded 1958.


gallant (adj.)

mid-15c., showy, finely dressed; gay, merry, from Old French galant courteous, earlier amusing,
entertaining; lively, bold (14c.), present participle of galer rejoice, make merry, generally held
to be from Latinized verb form of Frankish *wala- good, well, from Proto-Germanic *wal- (source also
of Old High German wallon to wander, go on a pilgrimage), from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (see
will (v.)), but the transition of sense offers difficulties that are not fully cleared up [OED].
Sense of politely attentive to women was adopted 17c. from French.


Prester John

c.1300, Prestre Johan, legendary medieval Christian king and priest, said to have ruled either in
the Far East or Ethiopia. From Vulgar Latin *prester, a transition between Latin presbyter and
English priest. First mentioned in the West by mid-12c. chronicler Otto of Freising, who told how
Johannes Presbyter won a great victory over the Persians and the Medes. Between 1165 and 1177 a
forged letter purporting to be from him circulated in Europe. All this recalls the time when the
Christian West was culturally backwards and militarily threatened, dreaming of a mythical deliverer.
Compare Old French prestre Jehan (13c.), Italian prete Gianni.


