trance (n.)

late 14c., state of extreme dread or suspense, also a half-conscious or insensible condition, state
of insensibility to mundane things, from Old French transe fear of coming evil, originally coma,
passage from life to death (12c.), from transir be numb with fear, originally die, pass on, from
Latin transire cross over (see transient). French trance in its modern sense has been reborrowed
from English.


entrance (v.)

to throw into a trance, 1590s, from en- (1) put in + trance (n.). Meaning to delight also is 1590s.
Related: Entranced; entrancing.


hypnotic (adj.)

1620s, inducing sleep, originally used of drugs, from French hypnotique (16c.) inclined to sleep,
soporific, from Late Latin hypnoticus, from Greek hypnotikos inclined to sleep, putting to sleep,
sleepy, from hypnoun put to sleep, from hypnos sleep (see somnolence). Modern sense of pertaining to
an induced trance first recorded in English 1843, along with hypnotist, hypnotize, both coined by
Dr. James Braid. Related: Hypnotical; hypnotically.


rapt (adj.)

late 14c., carried away in an ecstatic trance, from Latin raptus, past participle of rapere seize,
carry off (see rape (v.)). A figurative sense, the notion is of carried up into Heaven (bodily or in
a dream), as in a saint's vision. Latin literal sense of carried away was in English from 1550s. In
15c.-17c. the word also sometimes could mean raped. Sense of engrossed first recorded c.1500. As a
past participle adjective, in English it spawned the back-formed verb rap to affect with rapture,
which was common c.1600-1750.


ecstasy (n.)

late 14c., in a frenzy or stupor, fearful, excited, from Old French estaise ecstasy, rapture, from
Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis entrancement, astonishment; any displacement, in New
Testament a trance, from existanai displace, put out of place, also drive out of one's mind
(existanai phrenon), from ek out (see ex-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta-
to stand (see stet).    Used by 17c. mystical writers for a state of rapture that stupefied the body
while the soul contemplated divine things, which probably helped the meaning shift to exalted state
of good feeling (1610s). Slang use for the drug 3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine dates from 1985.


dwell (v.)

Old English dwellan to mislead, deceive, originally to make a fool of, lead astray, from Proto-
Germanic *dwelan to go or lead astray (cognates: Old Norse dv&ouml;l delay, dvali sleep; Middle
Dutch dwellen to stun, make giddy, perplex; Old High German twellen to hinder, delay; Danish dvale
trance, stupor, dvaelb&aelig;r narcotic berry, source of Middle English dwale nightshade), from PIE
*dhwel-, extended form of root *dheu- (1) dust, cloud, vapor, smoke (and related notions of
defective perception or wits).    Related to Old English gedweola error, heresy, madness. Sense
shifted in Middle English through hinder, delay, to linger (c.1200, as still in phrase to dwell
upon), to make a home (mid-13c.). Related: Dwelled; dwelt; dwells.


