trappings (n.)

late 14c., horse-cloth, from Middle English trappe ornamental cloth for a horse (c.1300), later
personal effects (mid-15c.), alteration of Middle French drap cloth (see drape (n.)).


traps (n.2)

drums, cymbals, bells, etc., 1925, from earlier trap drummer (1903) street musician who plays a drum
and several other instruments at once, perhaps from traps belongings (1813), shortened form of
trappings.


pontifical (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French pontifical and directly from Latin pontificalis of or pertaining to
the high priest, from pontifex (see pontifex). Hence pontificalia trappings of a bishop.


ornament (n.)

early 13c., an accessory, from Old French ornement ornament, decoration, and directly from Latin
ornamentum apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration, trinket, from ornare equip,
adorn (see ornate). Meaning decoration, embellishment in English is attested from late 14c. (also a
secondary sense in classical Latin). Figurative use from 1550s.


stalk (v.1)

pursue stealthily, Old English -stealcian, as in bestealcian to steal along, walk warily, from
Proto-Germanic *stalkon, frequentative of PIE *stel-, possibly a variant of *ster- (3) to rob, steal
(see steal (v.)). Compare hark/hear, talk/tell). In another view the Old English word might be from
a sense of stalk (v.1), influenced by stalk (n.). Meaning harass obsessively first recorded 1991.
Related: Stalked; stalking.    A stalking-horse in literal use was a horse draped in trappings and
trained to allow a fowler to conceal himself behind it to get within range of the game; figurative
sense of person who participates in a proceeding to disguise its real purpose is recorded from
1610s.


harness (n.)

c.1300, personal fighting equipment, body armor, also armor or trappings of a war-horse, from Old
French harnois arms, equipment; harness; male genitalia; tackle; household equipment, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Old Norse *hernest provisions for an army, from herr army (see harry) + nest
provisions (see nostalgia). Non-military sense of fittings for a beast of burden is from early 14c.
German Harnisch harness, armor is the French word, borrowed into Middle High German. The Celtic
words also are believed to be from French, as are Spanish arnes, Portuguese arnez, Italian arnese.
Prive harness (late 14c.) was a Middle English term for sex organs.


odd (adj.)

c.1300, constituting a unit in excess of an even number, from Old Norse oddi third or additional
number, as in odda-ma&eth;r third man, odd man (who gives the casting vote), odda-tala odd number.
The literal meaning of Old Norse oddi is point of land, angle (related via notion of triangle to
oddr point of a weapon); from Proto-Germanic *uzdaz pointed upward (cognates: Old English ord point
of a weapon, spear, source, beginning, Old Frisian ord point, place, Dutch oord place, region, Old
High German ort point, angle, German Ort place), from PIE *uzdho- (cognates: Lithuanian us-nis
thistle). None of the other languages, however, shows the Old Norse development from point to third
number. Used from late 14c. to indicate a surplus over any given sum.    Sense of strange, peculiar
first attested 1580s from notion of odd one out, unpaired one of three (attested earlier, c.1400, as
singular in a positive sense of renowned, rare, choice). Odd job (c.1770) is so called from notion
of not regular. Odd lot incomplete or random set is from 1897. The international order of Odd
Fellows began as local social clubs in England, late 18c., with Masonic-type trappings; formally
organized 1813 in Manchester.


