travail (n.)

labor, toil, mid-13c., from Old French travail work, labor, toil, suffering or painful effort,
trouble; arduous journey (12c.), from travailler to toil, labor, originally to trouble, torture,
torment, from Vulgar Latin *tripaliare to torture, from *tripalium (in Late Latin trepalium)
instrument of torture, probably from Latin tripalis having three stakes (from tria three; see three
+ palus stake; see pale (n.)), which sounds ominous, but the exact notion is obscure. The verb is
recorded from late 13c. in English, from the verb in Old French.


travois (n.)

type of American Indian transport, 1847, said to be ultimately from a Canadian Indian pronunciation
of travail.


labor (n.)

c.1300, a task, a project; later exertion of the body; trouble, difficulty, hardship (late 14c.),
from Old French labor labor, toil, work, exertion, task (12c., Modern French labeur), from Latin
laborem (nominative labor) labor, toil, exertion; hardship, pain, fatigue; a work, a product of
labor, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally from the notion of tottering under a burden, and
related to labere to totter.    Meaning body of laborers considered as a class (usually contrasted
to capitalists) is from 1839. Sense of physical exertions of childbirth is 1590s, earlier labour of
birthe (early 15c.), a sense also found in Old French, and compare French en travail in (childbirth)
suffering (see travail). Labor Day first marked 1882 in New York City.


travel (v.)

late 14c., to journey, from travailen (1300) to make a journey, originally to toil, labor (see
travail). The semantic development may have been via the notion of go on a difficult journey, but it
also may reflect the difficulty of any journey in the Middle Ages. Replaced Old English faran.
Related: Traveled; traveling. Traveled (adj.) having made journeys, experienced in travel is from
early 15c. Traveling salesman is attested from 1885.


labor (v.)

late 14c., perform manual or physical work; work hard; keep busy; take pains, strive, endeavor (also
copulate), from Old French laborer work, toil; struggle, have difficulty, from Latin laborare, from
labor (see labor (n.)). The verb in modern French, Spanish, Portuguese means to plow; the wider
sense being taken by the equivalent of English travail. Sense of to endure pain, suffer is early
15c., especially in phrase labor of child. Related: Labored; laboring.


sore (adj.)

Old English sar painful, grievous, aching, sad, wounding, influenced in meaning by Old Norse sarr
sore, wounded, from Proto-Germanic *saira- suffering, sick, ill (cognates: Old Frisian sar painful,
Middle Dutch seer, Dutch zeer sore, ache, Old High German ser painful, Gothic sair pain, sorrow,
travail), from PIE root *sai- (1) suffering (cognates: Old Irish saeth pain, sickness).    Adverbial
use (as in sore afraid) is from Old English sare but has mostly died out (replaced by sorely), but
remains the main meaning of German cognate sehr very. Slang meaning angry, irritated is first
recorded 1738.


