traverse (n.)

act of passing through a gate, crossing a bridge, etc., mid-14c., from Old French travers, from
traverser (see traverse (v.)). Meaning a passage by which one may traverse is recorded from 1670s.
Military fortification sense of barrier, barricade is recorded from 1590s.


traverse (v.)

early 14c., pass across, over, or through, from Old French traverser to cross, place across (11c.),
from Vulgar Latin *traversare, from Latin transversare to cross, throw across, from Latin
transversus turn across (see transverse). As an adjective from early 15c. Related: Traversed;
traversing.


Travis

masc. proper name, also a surname (late 12c.), from an Old French word meaning to cross over,
related to traverse (v.). Probably a name for a gatekeeper or the toll collector of a bridge.


hoot (v.)

to call or shout in disapproval or scorn, c.1600, probably related to or a variant of Middle English
houten, huten to shout, call out (c.1200), probably ultimately imitative. First used of bird cries,
especially that of the owl, mid-15c. Related: Hooted; hooting. As a noun from mid-15c. Meaning a
laugh, something funny is first recorded 1942. Slang sense of smallest amount or particle (the hoot
you don't give when you don't care) is from 1891.    A dod blasted ole fool! answered the captain,
who, till now, had been merely an amused on-looker. Ye know all this rumpus wont do nobuddy a hoot
o' good--not a hoot. [Along Traverse Shores, Traverse City, Michigan, 1891]   Hooter in the same
sense is from 1839.   <b>HOOTER</b>. Probably a corruption of iota. Common in New York in such
phrases as I don't care a hooter for him. This note ain't worth a hooter. [John Russell Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1877]


walk-over (n.)

easy victory, 1838, such as one that happens in the absence of competitors, when the solitary
starter, being obliged to complete the event, can traverse the course at a walk. Transferred sense
of anything accomplished with great ease is attested from 1902. To walk (all) over (someone) treat
with contempt is from 1851.


diverse (adj.)

c.1300, spelling variant of divers (q.v.), perhaps by analogy with converse, traverse, etc. In some
cases directly from Latin diversus, and since c.1700 restricted to the meaning different in
character or quality. Related: Diversely.


Montana

U.S. state, from Latinized form of Spanish monta&ntilde;a mountain, from Latin mont-, stem of mons
(see mountain). Proposed 1864 by U.S. Rep. James H. Ashley of Ohio when it was created as a
territory from Nebraska Territory, in reference to the Rocky Mountains, which however traverse only
one end of it. Admitted as a state 1889. Related: Montanan.


woebegone (adj.)

c.1300, in expressions such as me is wo bigone woe has beset me, from woe + begon to beset,
surround, overwhelm, from Old English began go over, traverse; inhabit, occupy; surround, beset,
overrun; from be + go.


search (v.)

c.1300, from Old French cerchier to search (12c., Modern French chercher), from Latin circare go
about, wander, traverse, in Late Latin to wander hither and thither, from circus circle (see
circus). Phrase search me as a verbal shrug of ignorance first recorded 1901. Search engine attested
from 1988. Search and destroy as a modifier is 1966, American English, from the Vietnam War. Search
and rescue is from 1944.


tread (v.)

Old English tredan to tread, step on, trample; traverse, pass over (class V strong verb; past tense
tr&aelig;d, past participle treden), from Proto-Germanic *tred- (cognates: Old Saxon tredan, Old
Frisian treda, Middle Dutch treden, Old High German tretan, German treten, Gothic trudan, Old Norse
tro&eth;a), from PIE *der- (1) assumed base of roots meaning 'to run, walk, step' [Watkins].
Related: Trod; treading.


traipse (v.)

1590s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French trepasser pass over or beyond, from Old
French trespasser cross, traverse, transgress (see trespass). Or from a source related to Middle
Dutch trappen, dialectal Norwegian trappa to tread, stamp (see trap (n.)). Liberman points out that
it resembles German traben tramp and other similar verbs meaning 'tramp; wander; flee' in several
European languages. They seem to have been part of soldiers' and vagabonds' slang between 1400 and
1700. In all likelihood, they originated as onomatopoeias and spread to neighboring languages from
Low German. Related: Traipsed; traipsing.


trespass (v.)

c.1300, transgress in some active manner, commit an aggressive offense, to sin, from Old French
trespasser pass beyond or across, cross, traverse; infringe, violate, from tres- beyond (from Latin
trans-; see trans-) + passer go by, pass (see pass (v.)). Meaning enter unlawfully is first attested
in forest laws of Scottish Parliament (c.1455). The Modern French descendant of Old French
trespasser, tr&eacute;passer, has come to be used euphemistically for to die (compare euphemistic
use of cross over, and obituary). Related: Trespassed; trespassing.


