treachery (n.)

treasonable or perfidious conduct, c.1200, from Old French trecherie, tricherie deceit, cheating,
trickery, lies (12c.), from trechier to cheat, deceive (see trick (n.)).


felony (n.)

c.1300, treachery, betrayal; deceit; villainy, wickedness, sin, crime; violent temper, wrath;
ruthlessness; evil intention, from Old French felonie (12c.) wickedness, evil, treachery, perfidy,
crime, cruelty, sin, from Gallo-Roman *fellonia, from fellonem evil-doer (see felon).    As a class
of crime in common law, also from c.1300, from Anglo-French. The exact definition changed over time
and place, and even the distinction from misdemeanor or trespass is not always observed. In old use
often a crime involving forfeiture of lands, goods, or a fee or a crime punishable by death.
Variously used in the U.S.; often the sense is crime punishable by death or imprisonment in a state
penitentiary.


fickle (adj.)

c.1200, false, treacherous, deceptive, deceitful, crafty (obsolete), probably from Old English ficol
deceitful, cunning, tricky, related to befician deceive, and to facen deceit, treachery; blemish,
fault. Common Germanic (compare Old Saxon fekan deceit, Old High German feihhan deceit, fraud,
treachery), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (see foe).    Sense of changeable,
inconstant, unstable is from c.1300 (especially of Fortune and women). Related: Fickleness. Fickly
(c.1300) is rare or obsolete. Also with a verb form in Middle English, fikelen to deceive, flatter,
later to puzzle, perplex, which survived long enough in Northern dialects to get into Scott's
novels. Fikel-tonge (late 14c.) was an allegorical or character name for one who speaks falsehoods.


falseness (n.)

c.1300, deceitfulness, treachery, faithlessness, dishonesty, from false + -ness.


untruth (n.)

Old English untreow&thorn; unfaithfulness, treachery, from un- (1) not + truth (n.). Similar
formation in Old Norse utryg&eth;. Meaning falsehood is attested from mid-15c., as is that of a lie.
Related: Untruthful.


barter (v.)

mid-15c., apparently from Old French barater to barter, cheat, deceive, haggle (also, to have sexual
intercourse), 12c., which is of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Celtic language (compare Irish
brath treachery). Connection between trading and cheating exists in several languages. Related:
Bartered; bartering. The noun is first recorded 1590s, from the verb.


falsity (n.)

c.1300, deceitfulness, treachery, dishonesty, from Old French fauset&eacute; falsehood (12c., Modern
French fausset&eacute;), from Late Latin falsitatem (nominative falsitas), from Latin falsus
erroneous, mistaken (see false). From late 14c. as untrue statement or doctrine; from 1570s as
character of being not true.


falsehood (n.)

c.1300, falshede, deceitfulness, also a lie; that which is false, from false + -hood. Formed on the
same pattern are Old Frisian falschede, Dutch valschheid, German Falschheit, Swedish falskhet.
Former noun forms in English, now extinct, included falsage wrongdoing (late 15c.), falsdom
deceitfulness, treachery; a lie (c.1300), fals-lek falsehood (early 14c.), falsshipe deceitfulness,
dishonesty (c.1200).


seduction (n.)

1520s, from Middle French s&eacute;duction, from Latin seductionem (nominative seductio), noun of
action from past participle stem of seducere (see seduce). Originally with reference to actions or
beliefs; sexual sense is from 1769, originally always with women as the objects. Earlier appearance
of the word in Middle English with a sense treason, treachery probably is a confusion with sedition,
which confusion also is found in Old French seducion treason, betrayal.


perfidy (n.)

1590s, from Middle French perfidie (16c.), from Latin perfidia faithlessness, falsehood, treachery,
from perfidus faithless, from phrase per fidem decipere to deceive through trustingness, from per
through (see per) + fidem (nominative fides) faith (see faith).    [C]ombinations of wickedness
would overwhelm the world by the advantage which licentious principles afford, did not those who
have long practiced perfidy grow faithless to each other. [Samuel Johnson, Life of Waller]


crime (n.)

mid-13c., sinfulness, from Old French crimne (12c., Modern French crime), from Latin crimen
(genitive criminis) charge, indictment, accusation; crime, fault, offense, perhaps from cernere to
decide, to sift (see crisis). But Klein (citing Brugmann) rejects this and suggests *cri-men, which
originally would have been cry of distress (Tucker also suggests a root in cry words and refers to
English plaint, plaintiff, etc.). Meaning offense punishable by law is from late 14c. The Latin word
is glossed in Old English by facen, also deceit, fraud, treachery. Crime wave first attested 1893,
American English.


treason (n.)

c.1200, betraying; betrayal of trust; breech of faith, from Anglo-French treson, from Old French
traison treason, treachery (11c.; Modern French trahison), from Latin traditionem (nominative
traditio) a handing over, delivery, surrender (see tradition). Old French form influenced by the
verb trair betray. In old English law, high treason is violation by a subject of his allegiance to
his sovereign or to the state; distinguished from petit treason, treason against a subject, such as
murder of a master by his servant. Constructive treason was a judicial fiction whereby actions
carried out without treasonable intent, but found to have the effect of treason, were punished as
though they were treason itself. The protection against this accounts for the careful wording of the
definition of treason in the U.S. Constitution.


trick (n.)

early 15c., a cheat, a mean ruse, from Old North French trique trick, deceit, treachery, cheating,
from trikier to deceive, to cheat, variant of Old French trichier to cheat, trick, deceive, of
uncertain origin, probably from Vulgar Latin *triccare, from Latin tricari be evasive, shuffle, from
tric&aelig; trifles, nonsense, a tangle of difficulties, of unknown origin.    Meaning a roguish
prank is recorded from 1580s; sense of the art of doing something is first attested 1610s. Meaning
prostitute's client is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for a robbery (1865). To do
the trick accomplish one's purpose is from 1812; to miss a trick fail to take advantage of
opportunity is from 1889; from 1872 in reference to playing the card-game of whist, which might be
the original literal sense. Trick-or-treat is recorded from 1942. Trick question is from 1907.


