treatise (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French tretiz (mid-13c.), contracted from Old French traitis treatise,
account, from traitier deal with; set forth in speech or writing (see treat (v.)).


tract (n.2)

little book, treatise mid-12c., probably a shortened form of Latin tractatus a handling, treatise,
treatment, from tractare to handle (see treat (v.)). Related: Tractarian.


monograph (n.)

treatise on a single subject, 1821, from mono- + -graph something written. Earlier was monography
(1773).


expository (adj.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin expositorius, from expositus, past participle of exponere (see expound).
Earlier in English as a noun meaning an expository treatise, commentary (early 15c.).


ditty (n.)

short song, c.1300, from Old French ditie composition, poem, treatise, from Latin dictatum thing
dictated, neuter past participle of dictare dictate (see dictate (v.)).


introductory (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin introductorius, from introduct-, past participle stem of introducere to lead
in, bring in (see introduction). Also used in English from c.1400 as a noun meaning introductory
treatise or textbook.


darkness (n.)

Old English deorcnysse, from dark + -ness. Figurative use is recorded from mid-14c. The 10c. Anglo-
Saxon treatise on astronomy uses &#254;eostrum for darkness.


-logy

word-forming element meaning a speaking, discourse, treatise, doctrine, theory, science, from Greek
-logia (often via French -logie or Medieval Latin -logia), from root of legein to speak; thus, the
character or deportment of one who speaks or treats of (a certain subject); see lecture (n.).


bestiary (n.)

medieval treatise on beasts usually with moralistic overtones, 1818, from Medieval Latin bestiarium
a menagerie, also a book about animals, from bestia (see beast). A Latin term for such works was
liber de bestiis compositus. Roman bestiarius meant a fighter against beasts in the public
entertainments.


physics (n.)

1580s, natural science, from physic in sense of natural science. Also see -ics. Based on Latin
physica (neuter plural), from Greek ta physika, literally the natural things, name of Aristotle's
treatise on nature. Specific sense of science treating of properties of matter and energy is from
1715.


meteorology (n.)

science of the atmosphere, weather forecasting, 1610s, from French m&eacute;t&eacute;orologie and
directly from Greek meteorologia treatise on celestial phenomena, discussion of high things, from
meteoron, literally thing high up (see meteor), + -logia treatment of (see -logy).


algebra (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin algebra, from Arabic al jabr (in vulgar pronunciation, al-jebr [Klein])
reunion of broken parts, as in computation, used 9c. by Baghdad mathematician Abu Ja'far Muhammad
ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi as the title of his famous treatise on equations (Kitab al-Jabr w'al-Muqabala
Rules of Reintegration and Reduction), which also introduced Arabic numerals to the West. The accent
shifted 17c. from second syllable to first. The word was used in English 15c.-16c. to mean bone-
setting, probably from Arab medical men in Spain.


dissertation (n.)

1610s, discussion, debate, from Latin dissertationem (nominative dissertatio) discourse, noun of
action from past participle stem of dissertare debate, argue, examine, harangue, frequentative of
disserere discuss, examine, from dis- apart (see dis-) + serere to arrange words (see series). Sense
of formal, written treatise is 1650s.


soliloquy (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin soliloquium a talking to oneself, from Latin solus alone (see sole (adj.)) +
loqui speak (see locution). Also used in translation of Latin Liber Soliloquiorum, a treatise by
Augustine, who is said to have coined the word, on analogy of Greek monologia (see monologue).
Related: Soliloquent.


lapidary (n.)

one skilled in working with precious stones, late 14c., from Old French lapidaire (12c.), from Latin
lapidarius stonecutter, originally an adjective of or working with stone, from lapis (genitive
lapidis) stone. Meaning a treatise on precious stones is late 14c. Related: Lapidarist.


scatology (n.)

obscene literature, 1876, with -logy treatise, study + Greek skat-, stem of skor (genitive skatos)
excrement, from PIE *sker- excrement, dung (cognates: Latin stercus dung), literally to cut off; see
shear (v.), and compare shit (v.). Related: Scatological (1886).


technology (n.)

1610s, a discourse or treatise on an art or the arts, from Greek tekhnologia systematic treatment of
an art, craft, or technique, originally referring to grammar, from tekhno- (see techno-) + -logy.
The meaning study of mechanical and industrial arts (Century Dictionary, 1902, gives examples of
spinning, metal-working, or brewing) is first recorded 1859. High technology attested from 1964;
short form high-tech is from 1972.


almagest (n.)

late 14c., title of a treatise on astronomy by Claudius Ptolemy of Alexandria, extended in Middle
English to other works on astrology or astronomy, from Old French almageste (13c.), from Arabic al
majisti, from al the + Greek megiste the greatest (composition), from fem. of megistos, superlative
of megas great (see mickle). Originally titled in Greek Megale syntaxis tes astronomios Great Work
on Astronomy; Arab translators in their admiration altered this.


syphilis (n.)

infectious venereal disease, 1718, Modern Latin, originally from the title of a poem, Syphilis, sive
Morbus Gallicus Syphilis, or the French Disease, published 1530, by Veronese doctor Girolamo
Fracastoro (1483-1553), which tells the tale of the shepherd Syphilus, supposed to be the first
sufferer from the disease. Fracastoro first used the word as a generic term for the disease in his
1546 treatise De Contagione. Why he chose the name is unknown; it may be intended as Latin for Pig-
lover, though there was also a Sipylus, a son of Niobe, in Ovid.


pamphlet (n.)

small, unbound treatise, late 14c., from Anglo-Latin panfletus, popular short form of Pamphilus, seu
de Amore (Pamphilus, or about Love), a short 12c. Latin love poem popular and widely copied in
Middle Ages; the name from Greek pamphilos loved by all, from pan- all + philos loving, dear see
-phile). Meaning brief work dealing with questions of current interest is late 16c.


gnome (n.)

dwarf-like earth-dwelling spirit, 1712, from French gnome, from Modern Latin gnomus, used 16c. in a
treatise by Paracelsus, who gave the name pigmaei or gnomi to elemental earth beings, possibly from
Greek *genomos earth-dweller (compare thalassonomos inhabitant of the sea). A less-likely suggestion
is that Paracelsus based it on the homonym that means intelligence (preserved in gnomic). Popular in
children's literature 19c. as a name for red-capped German and Swiss folklore dwarfs. Garden
figurines first imported to England late 1860s from Germany.


antidote (n.)

remedy counteracting poison, 1510s (earlier in English as a Latin word), from Middle French antidot
and directly from Latin antidotum a remedy against poison, from Greek antidoton given as a remedy,
literally given against, verbal adjective of antididonai give in return, from anti- against +
didonai to give (see date (n.1)). Compare Middle English antidotarie treatise on drugs or medicines
(c.1400).


Kama Sutra

also Kamasutra, 1874, from Sanskrit Kama Sutra, name of the ancient treatise on love and sexual
performance, from kama love (see whore) + sutra series of aphorisms (see sutra).


midget (n.)

as a type of tiny biting insect, 1839, American English, from midge, perhaps with diminutive suffix
-et.    Dr. Webster is in error in saying the word midge is not in use at the present day. In the
neighboring Green mountain districts, one or more most annoying species of Simulium that there
abound, are daily designated in common conversation as the midges, or, as the name is often
corrupted, the midgets. From Dr. Harris' treatise it appears that the same name is in popular use
for the same insects in Maine. The term is limited in this country, we believe, exclusively to those
minute insects, smaller than the musketoe, which suck the blood of other animals. [Transactions of
the New-York State Agricultural Society, vol. VI, Albany, 1847]    Transferred sense of very small
person is attested by 1854. It is also noted mid-19c. as a pet form of Margaret.


style (n.)

early 14c., stile, writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative,
treatise; also characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression, and way of
life, manner, behavior, conduct, from Old French stile, estile style, fashion, manner; a stake,
pale, from Latin stilus stake, instrument for writing, manner of writing, mode of expression,
perhaps from the same source as stick (v.)). Spelling modified incorrectly by influence of Greek
stylos pillar, which probably is not directly related. As distinguished from substance, 1570s.
Meaning mode of dress is from 1814.


perspire (v.)

1640s, to evaporate through the pores, a back-formation from perspiration and in part from Latin
perspirare to breathe, to blow constantly (see perspiration). Meaning to sweat is a polite usage
attested from 1725. Medical men tried to maintain a distinction between sensible (sweat) and
insensible perspiration:  [I]t is sufficient for common use to observe, that perspiration is that
insensible discharge of vapour from the whole surface of the body and the lungs which is constantly
going on in a healthy state; that it is always natural and always salutary; that sweat, on the
contrary, is an evacuation, which never appears without some uncommon effort, or some disease to the
system, that it weakens and relaxes, and is so far from coinciding with perspiration, that it
obstructs and checks it. [Charles White, A Treatise on the Management of Pregnant and Lying-in
Women, London, 1791]  Related: Perspired; perspiring.


zone (n.)

late 14c., from Latin zona geographical belt, celestial zone, from Greek zone a belt, the girdle
worn by women at the hips, related to zonnynai to gird, from PIE root *yos- to gird (cognates:
Avestan yasta- girt, Lithuanian juosiu to gird, Old Church Slavonic po-jasu girdle). The 10c. Anglo-
Saxon treatise on astronomy translates Latin quinque zonas as fyf gyrdlas.    Originally one of the
five great divisions of the earth's surface (torrid, temperate, frigid; separated by tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn and Arctic and Antarctic circles); meaning any discrete region is first
recorded 1822. Zone defense in team sports is recorded from 1927.


electric (adj.)

1640s, first used in English by physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682), apparently coined as Modern
Latin electricus (literally resembling amber) by English physicist William Gilbert (1540-1603) in
treatise De Magnete (1600), from Latin electrum amber, from Greek elektron amber (Homer, Hesiod,
Herodotus), also pale gold (a compound of 1 part silver to 4 of gold); of unknown origin.
Originally the word described substances which, like amber, attract other substances when rubbed.
Meaning charged with electricity is from 1670s; the physical force so called because it first was
generated by rubbing amber. In many modern instances, the word is short for electrical. Figurative
sense is attested by 1793. Electric toothbrush first recorded 1936; electric typewriter 1958.


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


coal (n.)

Old English col charcoal, live coal, from Proto-Germanic *kula(n) (cognates: Old Frisian kole,
Middle Dutch cole, Dutch kool, Old High German chol, German Kohle, Old Norse kol), from PIE root
*g(e)u-lo- live coal (cognates: Irish gual coal).    Meaning mineral consisting of fossilized carbon
is from mid-13c. First mentioned (370 B.C.E.) by Theophrastus in his treatise On Stones under the
name lithos anthrakos (see anthrax). Traditionally good luck, coal was given as a New Year's gift in
England, said to guarantee a warm hearth for the coming year. The phrase drag (or rake) over the
coals was a reference to the treatment meted out to heretics by Christians. To carry coals do dirty
work, also submit to insult is from 1520s. To carry coals to Newcastle (c.1600) Anglicizes Greek
glauk eis Athenas owls to Athens.


text (n.)

late 14c., wording of anything written, from Old French texte, Old North French tixte text, book;
Gospels (12c.), from Medieval Latin textus the Scriptures, text, treatise, in Late Latin written
account, content, characters used in a document, from Latin textus style or texture of a work,
literally thing woven, from past participle stem of texere to weave, to join, fit together, braid,
interweave, construct, fabricate, build, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to make; make
wicker or wattle framework (see texture (n.)).    An ancient metaphor: thought is a thread, and the
raconteur is a spinner of yarns -- but the true storyteller, the poet, is a weaver. The scribes made
this old and audible abstraction into a new and visible fact. After long practice, their work took
on such an even, flexible texture that they called the written page a textus, which means cloth.
[Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style]


America

1507, in Cartographer Martin Waldseem&uuml;ller's treatise Cosmographiae Introductio, from Modern
Latin Americanus, after Amerigo Vespucci (1454-1512) who made two trips to the New World as a
navigator and claimed to have discovered it. His published works put forward the idea that it was a
new continent, and he was first to call it Novus Mundus New World. Amerigo is more easily Latinized
than Vespucci.    The name Amerigo is Germanic, said to derive from Gothic Amalrich, literally work-
ruler. The Old English form of the name has come down as surnames Emmerich, Emery, etc. The Italian
fem. form merged into Amelia.    Colloquial pronunciation Ameri-kay, not uncommon 19c., goes back to
at least 1643 and a poem that rhymed the word with away. Amerika U.S. society viewed as racist,
fascist, oppressive, etc. first attested 1969; the spelling is German, but may also suggest the KKK.
It is interesting to remember that the song which is essentially Southern -- Dixie -- and that which
is essentially Northern -- Yankee Doodle -- never really had any serious words to them. [The
Bookman, June 1910]   <hr />   FREDONIA, FREDONIAN, FREDE, FREDISH, &amp;c.; &amp;c.;    These
extraordinary words, which have been deservedly ridiculed here as well as in England, were proposed
sometime ago, and countenanced by two or three individuals, as names for the territory and people of
the United States. The general term American is now commonly understood (at least in all places
where the English language is spoken,) to mean an inhabitant of the United States; and is so
employed, except where unusual precision of language is required. [Pickering, 1816]


