tread (n.)

early 13c., a step or stepping, pressure with the foot, from tread (v.); in reference to automobile
tires, it is recorded from 1906.


treadle (n.)

lever worked by foot, c.1400, from Old English tredel step, stair, sole of the foot, from tredan to
tread (see tread (v.)) + instrumental suffix -el (compare handle (n.)).


treadmill (n.)

invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill
(n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s.    As a corrective
punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the prisoners,
and is not likely to be easily forgotten, while it is an occupation which by no means interferes
with, nor is calculated to lessen the value of, those branches of prison regulation which provide
for the moral and religious improvement of the criminal. [Description of the Tread Mill Invented by
Mr. William Cubitt of Ipswich for the Employment of Prisoners, London, 1822]    By later generations
regarded as a path to physical fitness.


tread (v.)

Old English tredan to tread, step on, trample; traverse, pass over (class V strong verb; past tense
tr&aelig;d, past participle treden), from Proto-Germanic *tred- (cognates: Old Saxon tredan, Old
Frisian treda, Middle Dutch treden, Old High German tretan, German treten, Gothic trudan, Old Norse
tro&eth;a), from PIE *der- (1) assumed base of roots meaning 'to run, walk, step' [Watkins].
Related: Trod; treading.


retread (v.)

to put a new tread on (a tire), 1908, from re- back, again (see re-) + tread (q.v.). The noun is
attested from 1914; in World War I it was Australian slang for a re-enlisted soldier.


inculcate (v.)

1540s, from Latin inculcatus, past participle of inculcare force upon, stamp in, tread down, from
in- in (see in- (2)) + calcare to tread, press in, from calx (1) heel. Related: Inculcated;
inculcating.


trot (n.)

a gait faster than a walk and slower than a run, c.1300, originally of horses, from Old French trot
a trot, trotting (12c.), from troter to trot, to go, from Frankish *trotton, from Proto-Germanic
*trott- (cognates: Old High German trotton to tread), derivative of *tred- (see tread (v.)). The
trots diarrhea is recorded from 1808 (compare the runs).


march (v.)

to walk with regular tread, early 15c., from Middle French marcher to march, walk, from Old French
marchier to stride, march, originally to trample, tread underfoot, perhaps from Frankish *markon or
some other Germanic source related to obsolete Middle English march (n.) borderland (see march
(n.2)). Or possibly from Gallo-Roman *marcare, from Latin marcus hammer, via notion of tramping the
feet. Meaning to cause to march is from 1590s. Related: Marched; marching. Marching band is attested
from 1852. Italian marciare, Spanish marchar are said to be from French.


trod

past tense of tread (v.).


trip (v.)

late 14c., tread or step lightly and nimbly, skip, dance, caper, from Old French triper jump around,
dance around, strike with the feet (12c.), from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch trippen to
skip, trip, hop; to stamp, trample, Low German trippeln, Frisian tripje, Dutch trappen, Old English
treppan to tread, trample) related to trap (n.).    The senses of to stumble (intransitive), strike
with the foot and cause to stumble (transitive) are from mid-15c. in English. Meaning to release (a
catch, lever, etc.) is recorded from 1897; trip-wire is attested from 1868. Related: Tripped;
tripping.


threshold (n.)

Old English &thorn;rescold, &thorn;&aelig;rscwold, &thorn;erxold, etc., door-sill, point of
entering, probably literally something to tread upon, with first element related to Old English
&thorn;rescan (see thresh), with its original sense of tread, trample. Second element of unknown
origin and much transformed in all the Germanic languages, suggesting its literal sense was lost
even in ancient times. In English it probably has been altered to conform to hold, but the oft-
repeated story that the threshold was a barrier placed at the doorway to hold the chaff flooring in
the room is mere folk etymology. Cognates include Old Norse &thorn;reskjoldr, Swedish tr&ouml;skel,
Old High German driscufli, German dialectal drischaufel. Figurative use was in Old English.


find (v.)

Old English findan come upon, meet with, discover; obtain by search or study (class III strong verb;
past tense fand, past participle funden), from Proto-Germanic *finthan to come upon, discover
(cognates: Old Saxon findan, Old Frisian finda, Old Norse finna, Middle Dutch vinden, Old High
German findan, German finden, Gothic fin&thorn;an), originally to come upon.    The Germanic word is
from PIE root *pent- to tread, go (cognates: Old High German fendeo pedestrian; Sanskrit panthah
path, way; Avestan panta way; Greek pontos open sea, patein to tread, walk; Latin pons (genitive
pontis) bridge; Old Church Slavonic poti path, peta heel; Russian put' path, way). To find out to
discover by scrutiny is from 1550s (Middle English had a verb, outfinden, c.1300).


trap (n.)

contrivance for catching unawares, late Old English tr&aelig;ppe, treppe snare, trap, from Proto-
Germanic *trep- (cognates: Middle Dutch trappe trap, snare), related to Germanic words for stair,
step, tread (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe step, stair, English
tread (v.)), and probably literally that on or into which one steps, from PIE *dreb-, extended form
of root *der- (1), an assumed base of words meaning to run, walk, step. Probably akin to Old French
trape, Spanish trampa trap, pit, snare, but the exact relationship is uncertain.    Sense of
deceitful practice, device or contrivance to betray one is first recorded c.1400. Meaning U-shaped
section of a drain pipe is from 1833. Slang meaning mouth is from 1776. Speed trap recorded from
1908. Trap door door in a floor or ceiling (often hidden and leading to a passageway or secret
place) is first attested late 14c.


untrodden (adj.)

c.1300, from un- (1) not + past participle of tread (v.).


footstep (n.)

early 13c., footprint, from foot (n.) + step (n.). Meaning a tread or fall of the foot is first
attested 1530s. Figurative expression to follow in (someone's) footsteps is from 1540s.


recap (v.)

1856, put a cap on again, from re- + cap (n.). Specific sense put a strip of rubber on the tread of
a tire is 1920s. As a shortened form of recapitulate, it dates from 1920s. Related: Recapped;
recapping.


full (v.)

to tread or beat cloth to cleanse or thicken it, late 14c., from Old French fouler, from Latin fullo
(see foil (v.)); Old English had the agent-noun fullere, probably directly from Latin fullo.


calque (n.)

loan translation of a foreign word or phrase, from French calque, literally a copy, from calquer to
trace by rubbing (itself borrowed in English 1660s as calk), introduced 16c. from Italian calcare,
from Latin calcare to tread, to press down.


trodden (adj.)

that has been stepped on, 1540s, past participle adjective from tread (v.). The past participle was
altered from Middle English treden under influence of Middle English past participles such as stolen
from steal.


pussyfoot (v.)

also pussy-foot, 1903, tread softly, from pussy (n.1) + foot (n.). As a noun from 1911, a detective,
American English, from the nickname of U.S. government Indian Affairs agent W.E. Johnson
(1862-1945), in charge of suppressing liquor traffic on Indian reservations in Oklahoma, who was
noted for his stealthy tactics. Related: Pussyfooting; pussy-footed (1893).


pons (n.)

bridge, in various Latin expressions, from Latin pons bridge, connecting gallery, walkway, earlier
probably way, passage, from PIE *pent- to go, tread (see find (v.)). Especially pons asinorum bridge
of asses, nickname for the fifth proposition of the first book of Euclid, which beginners and slow
wits find difficulty in getting over: if two sides of a triangle are equal, the angles opposite
these sides also are equal.


tramp (v.)

late 14c., walk heavily, stamp, from Middle Low German trampen to stamp, from Proto-Germanic *tremp-
(cognates: Danish trampe, Swedish trampa to tramp, stamp, Gothic ana-trimpan to press upon), from
PIE *der- (1) to run, walk, step (see tread (v.)). Related: Tramped; tramping.


peripatetic (n.)

c.1400, disciple of Aristotle, from Old French perypatetique (14c.), from Latin peripateticus
pertaining to the disciples or philosophy of Aristotle, from Greek peripatetikos given to walking
about (especially while teaching), from peripatein walk up and down, walk about, from peri- around
(see peri-) + patein to walk, tread (see find (v.)). Aristotle's custom was to teach while strolling
through the Lyceum in Athens. In English, the philosophical meaning is older than that of person who
wanders about (1610s).


pave (v.)

early 14c., to cover (a street) with stones or other material, from Old French paver to pave (12c.),
perhaps a back-formation from Old French pavement or else from Vulgar Latin *pavare, from Latin
pavire to beat, ram, tread down, from PIE *pau- to cut, strike, stamp (cognates: Latin putare to
prune; Greek paiein to strike; Lithuanian piauju to cut, piuklas saw). Related: Paved; paving. The
figurative sense of make smooth (as in pave the way) is attested from 1580s.


trade (v.)

1540s, to tread a path, from trade (n.). Meaning to occupy oneself (in something) is recorded from
c.1600. Meaning to barter is by 1793. The U.S. sports team sense of to exchange one player for
another is attested from 1899. Related: Traded; trading. To trade down is attested from 1942; trade
up from 1959. Trade places exchange situations is from 1917. Trading post is recorded from 1796.
Trading stamp, given by merchants and exchangeable for goods, is from 1897.


causeway (n.)

1570s, from Middle English cauceweye raised road (mid-15c.), first element from Anglo-French cauce,
Old North French cauciee (12c., Modern French chauss&#233;e), from Vulgar Latin *via calciata paved
way, from Latin calcis, genitive of calx (2) limestone, or Late Latin calciare to stamp with the
heels, tread (on notion of a road or mound across marshy ground made firm by treading down), from
Latin calx (1) heel. For second element, see way (n.).


trade (n.)

late 14c., path, track, course of action, introduced by the Hanse merchants, from Middle Dutch or
Middle Low German trade track, course (probably originally of a ship), cognate with Old English
tredan (see tread (v.)).    Sense of one's habitual business (1540s) developed from the notion of
way, course, manner of life (mid-15c.); sense of buying and selling, exchange of commodities is from
1550s. Meaning act of trading is from 1829. Trade-name is from 1821; trade-route is from 1873;
trade-war is from 1899. Trade union is attested from 1831. Trade wind (1640s) has nothing to do with
commerce, but preserves the obsolete sense of in a habitual or regular course.


pad (n.)

1550s, bundle of straw to lie on, possibly from or related to Low German or obsolete Flemish pad
sole of the foot, which is perhaps from PIE *pent- to tread, go (see find (v.)), but see path (n.).
Meaning cushion-like part of an animal foot is from 1790 in English. Generalized sense of something
soft is from c.1700; the sense of a number of sheets fastened together (in writing pad, drawing pad,
etc.) is from 1865.    Sense of takeoff or landing place for a helicopter is from 1960. The word
persisted in underworld slang from early 18c. in the sense sleeping place, and was popularized again
c.1959, originally in beatnik speech (later hippie slang) in its original English sense of place to
sleep temporarily.


traipse (v.)

1590s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from dialectal French trepasser pass over or beyond, from Old
French trespasser cross, traverse, transgress (see trespass). Or from a source related to Middle
Dutch trappen, dialectal Norwegian trappa to tread, stamp (see trap (n.)). Liberman points out that
it resembles German traben tramp and other similar verbs meaning 'tramp; wander; flee' in several
European languages. They seem to have been part of soldiers' and vagabonds' slang between 1400 and
1700. In all likelihood, they originated as onomatopoeias and spread to neighboring languages from
Low German. Related: Traipsed; traipsing.


handle (n.)

Old English handle, formed from hand (n.) with instrumental suffix -le indicating a tool in the way
thimble was formed from thumb, spindle from spin, treadle from tread, etc. The slang sense of
nickname is first recorded 1870, originally U.S., from earlier expressions about adding a handle to
(one's) name, i.e. a title such as Mister or Sir, attested from 1833. To fly off the handle (1833)
is a figurative reference to an ax head (to be off the handle be excited is recorded from 1825,
American English). To get a handle on get control of is recorded by 1919.


cockatrice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cocatriz, altered (by influence of coq) from Late Latin *calcatrix, from
Latin calcare to tread (from calx (1) heel), as translation of Greek ikhneumon, literally tracker,
tracer.    In classical writings, an Egyptian animal of some sort, the mortal enemy of the
crocodile, which it tracks down and kills. This vague sense became hopelessly confused in the
Christian West, and in England the word ended up applied to the equivalent of the basilisk. A
serpent hatched from a cock's egg, it was fabled to kill by its glance and could be slain only by
tricking it into seeing its own reflection. Belief in them persisted even among the educated because
the word was used in the KJV several times to translate a Hebrew word for serpent. In heraldry, a
beast half cock, half serpent.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


decal (n.)

by 1909, shortening of decalcomania, from French d&eacute;calcomanie, from d&eacute;calquer (18c.)
transferring of a tracing from specially prepared paper to glass, porcelain, etc. (in vogue in
France 1840s, England 1862-64), from de- off + calquer to press, from Italian calcare, from Latin
calcare to tread on, press.    Time was when there were only printers employed in making the sheets
that were stuck on the ware, giving the old-time term of plain print. This form of decoration was
succeeded a few years ago by the decalcomania or decal. This decal is an imported sheet,
lithographed, and the little sprigs, flowers and scenes are cut out and stuck on the ware. [Brick,
the Leading Clay Journal, April 1909]


path (n.)

Old English pa&thorn;, p&aelig;&thorn; path, track, from West Germanic *patha- (cognates: Old
Frisian path, Middle Dutch pat, Dutch pad, Old High German pfad, German Pfad path), of uncertain
origin. The original initial -p- in a Germanic word is an etymological puzzle. Don Ringe (From
Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic, Oxford 2006) describes it as An obvious loan from Iranian
..., clearly borrowed after Grimmâ&euro;&trade;s Law had run its course. Watkins says the word is
probably borrowed (? via Scythian) from Iranian *path-, from PIE root *pent- to tread, go, pass
(source of Avestan patha way; see find (v.)), but this is too much of a stretch for OED and others.
In Scotland and Northern England, commonly a steep ascent of a hill or in a road.


thresh (v.)

Old English &thorn;rescan, &thorn;erscan, to beat, sift grain by trampling or beating, from Proto-
Germanic *threskan to thresh, originally to tread, to stamp noisily (cognates: Middle Dutch
derschen, Dutch dorschen, Old High German dreskan, German dreschen, Old Norse &thorn;reskja, Swedish
tr&#246;ska, Gothic &thorn;riskan), from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)).    The
basic notion is of men or oxen treading out wheat; later, with the advent of the flail, the word
acquired its modern extended sense of to knock, beat, strike. The original Germanic sense is
suggested by the use of the word in Romanic languages that borrowed it, such as Italian trescare to
prance, Old French treschier to dance, Spanish triscar to stamp the feet.


step (v.)

Old English steppan (Anglian), st&aelig;ppan (West Saxon) take a step, from West Germanic *stap-
tread (cognates: Old Frisian stapa, Middle Dutch, Dutch stappen, Old High German stapfon, German
stapfen step), from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; to support, place firmly on (see staff (n.);
cognates: Old Church Slavonic stopa step, pace, stepeni step, degree). The notion is perhaps a
treading firmly on; a foothold.    Transitive sense (as in step foot in) attested from 1530s.
Related: Stepped; stepping. Originally strong (past tense stop, past participle bestapen); weak
forms emerged 13c., universal from 16c. To step out leave for a short time is from 1530s; meaning to
go out in public in style is from 1907. Step on it hurry up is 1923, from notion of gas pedal.


sputnik (n.)

artificial satellite, extended from the name of the one launched by the Soviet Union Oct. 4, 1957,
from Russian sputnik satellite, literally traveling companion (in this use short for sputnik zemlyi,
traveling companion of the Earth) from Old Church Slavonic supotiniku, from Russian so-, s- with,
together + put' path, way, from Old Church Slavonic poti, from PIE *pent- to tread, go (see find
(v.)) + agent suffix -nik.    The electrifying impact of the launch on the West can be gauged by the
number of new formations in -nik around this time (the suffix had been present in a Yiddish context
for at least a decade before); Laika, the stray dog launched aboard Sputnik 2 (Nov. 2, 1957), which
was dubbed muttnik in the Detroit Free Press, etc. The rival U.S. satellite which failed to reach
orbit in 1957 (because the Vanguard rocket blew up on the launch pad) derided as a kaputnik (in the
Daytona Beach Morning Journal), a dudnik (Christian Science Monitor), a flopnik (Youngstown
Vindicator, New York Times), a pffftnik (National Review), and a stayputnik (Vancouver Sun).


reptile (n.)

late 14c., creeping or crawling animal, from Old French reptile (early 14c.) and directly from Late
Latin reptile, noun use of neuter of reptilis (adj.) creping, crawling, from rept-, past participle
stem of repere to crawl, creep, from PIE root *rep- to creep, crawl (cognates: Lithuanian replioju
to creep). Used of persons of low character from 1749.    Precise scientific use began to develop
mid-18c., but the word was used as well at first of animals now known as amphibians, including
toads, frogs, salamanders; separation of Reptilia (1835 as a distinct class) and Amphibia took place
early 19c.; popular use lagged, and reptile still was used late 18c. with sense An animal that
creeps upon many feet [Johnson, who calls the scorpion a reptile], sometimes excluding serpents.
And the terrestrial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or beasts, reptiles, which have many
feet, and serpents, which have no feet at all. [Locke, Elements of Natural Philosophy, 1689]   <hr
/>   An inadvertent step may crush the snail  That crawls at ev'ning in the public path ;  But he
that has humanity, forewarn'd,  Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.  [Cowper, The Task,
1785]    The Old English word for reptile was slincend, related to slink.


