treasure (n.)

mid-12c., tresor, from Old French tresor treasury, hoard, treasure (11c., Modern French
tr&#233;sor), from Gallo-Roman *tresaurus, from Latin thesaurus treasury, treasure (source also of
Spanish, Italian tesoro), from Greek thesauros store, treasure, treasure house (see thesaurus). In
Middle English also thresur, etc.; modern spelling is from 16c. Replaced Old English goldhord.
General sense of anything valued is recorded from c.1200. Treasure hunt is first recorded 1913. For
treasure trove, see trove.


treasure (v.)

late 14c., to amass treasure; to store up for the future, also figurative, regard as precious,
retain carefully in the mind, from treasure (n.). Related: Treasured; treasuring.


treasurer (n.)

late 13c., from Old North French, Anglo-French tresorer, Old French tresorier, from tresor (see
treasure (n.)). Treasury bill attested from 1797.


hoard (n.)

Old English hord treasure, valuable stock or store, from Proto-Germanic *huzdam (cognates: Old Saxon
hord treasure, hidden or inmost place, Old Norse hodd, German Hort, Gothic huzd treasure, literally
hidden treasure), from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)).


treasury (n.)

c.1300, room for treasure, from Old French tresorie treasury (11c.), from tresor (see treasure
(n.)). Meaning department of state that controls public revenue is recorded from late 14c. An Old
English word for room for treasure was ma&eth;m-hus.


trove (n.)

1888, from treasure trove (c.1550), from Anglo-French tresor trov&eacute; (late 12c.), translating
Latin thesaurus inventus, literally treasure found. Originally any precious metal object one finds
hidden whose owner is unknown. As this usually meant ancient hoards, the term came to mean treasure
hoard in popular use. Rendered treasure found from mid-15c. French trove is past participle of
trover to find, from Old French trover, torver, of unknown origin, perhaps from Latin turbare to
move (hence to seek for) or Medieval Latin *tropare to compose, sing.


thesaurus (n.)

1823, treasury, storehouse, from Latin thesaurus treasury, a hoard, a treasure, something laid up,
figuratively repository, collection, from Greek thesauros a treasure, treasury, storehouse, chest,
from root of tithenai to put, to place (see theme). The meaning encyclopedia filled with information
is from 1840, but existed earlier as thesaurarie (1590s), used as a title by early dictionary
compilers, on the notion of thesaurus verborum a treasury of words. Meaning collection of words
arranged according to sense is first attested 1852 in Roget's title. Thesaurer is attested in Middle
English for treasurer and thesaur treasure was in use 15c.-16c.


schatzi (n.)

German girlfriend, from German Schatzi, diminutive of Schatz, a term of endearment for a woman,
literally treasure, from Proto-Germanic *skatta- (cognates: Dutch schat treasure, Gothic skatts
piece of money, money), originally cattle.


Jasper

masc. proper name, English form of Caspar or of Gaspar, the traditional name of one of the Three
Kings. Said by Klein to be of Persian origin and meaning literally treasure-holder. Used from 1896
for a rustic simpleton.


mine (v.1)

to dig, c.1300, to tunnel under fortifications to overthrow them, from mine (n.1) or from Old French
miner to dig, mine; exterminate. From mid-14c. as to dig in the earth (for treasure, etc.).
Figurative use from mid-14c. Related: Mined; mining.


garrison (n.)

c.1300, store, treasure, from Old French garison defense (Modern French gu&eacute;rison cure,
recovery, healing) from garir defend (see garret). Meaning fortified stronghold is from early 15c.;
that of body of troops in a fortress is from mid-15c., a sense taken over from Middle English
garnison body of armed men (late 14c.), from Old French garnison provision, munitions, from garnir
to furnish, provide.


strain (n.2)

line of descent, lineage, breed, ancestry, c.1200, from Old English strion, streon a gain,
acquisition, treasure; a begetting, procreation, from Proto-Germanic *streu-nam- to pile up, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Hence race, stock, line (early
14c.). Applied to animal species from c.1600; usually involving fairly minor variations, but not
distinct from breed (n.). Normal sound development would have yielded *streen, but the word was
altered in late Middle English, apparently by influence of strain (n.1).


cabinet (n.)

1540s, secret storehouse, treasure chamber, from Middle French cabinet small room (16c.), diminutive
of Old French cabane cabin (see cabin); perhaps influenced by (or rather, from) Italian gabbinetto,
diminutive of gabbia, from Latin cavea stall, stoop, cage, den for animals (see cave (n.)).
Meaning case for safe-keeping (of papers, liquor, etc.) is from 1540s, gradually shading to mean a
piece of furniture that does this. Sense of private room where advisors meet (c.1600) led to modern
political meaning (1640s); perhaps originally short for cabinet council (1630s); compare board (n.1)
in its evolution from place where some group meets to the word for the group that meets there.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


