tremulous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin tremulus shaking, quivering, from tremere to shake, quake, quiver (see tremble
(v.)). Related: Tremulously; tremulousness.


tremolo (n.)

tremulous effect in music, 1801, from Italian tremolo, from Latin tremulus trembling (see
tremulous).


shimmer (n.)

a tremulous light, 1821, from shimmer (v.).


shiver (n.2)

a tremulous, quivering motion, 1727, from shiver (v.1). The shivers in reference to fever chills is
from 1861.


vibration (n.)

1650s, from Latin vibrationem (nominative vibratio) a shaking, a brandishing, noun of action from
past participle stem of vibrare set in tremulous motion (see vibrate). Meaning intuitive signal
about a person or thing was popular late 1960s, but has been recorded as far back as 1899. Related:
Vibrational.


vibrato

1861 (adv.), 1870 (n.), tremulous effect in music, from Italian vibrato, from Latin vibratus, past
participle of vibrare to vibrate (see vibrate).    Strictly, the vibrato is distinct from the
tremolo, in that the latter involves a perceptible variation in pitch; but in common usage the terms
are made synonymous. [Century Dictionary]


vibrate (v.)

1610s (intransitive) move to and fro; 1660s, swing to and fro; from Latin vibratus, past participle
of vibrare set in tremulous motion, move quickly to and fro, quiver, tremble, shake, from PIE *wib-
ro-, from root *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically, move quickly to and fro (cognates:
Lithuanian wyburiu to wag (the tail), Danish vippe, Dutch wippen to swing, Old English wipan to
wipe). Transitive sense cause to vibrate is from c.1700. Related: Vibrated; vibrating.


twitterpated (adj.)

1942, apparently first attested in the Walt Disney movie Bambi (there also was a song by that name
but it was not in the studio release of the film), a past participle adjective formed from twitter
in the tremulous excitement noun sense (1670s) + pate (n.2) head (compare flutterpated, 1894).
Thumper: Why are they acting that way?   Friend Owl: Why, don't you know? They're twitterpated.
Flower, Bambi, Thumper: Twitterpated?   Friend Owl: Yes. Nearly everybody gets twitterpated in the
springtime. For example: You're walking along, minding your own business. You're looking neither to
the left, nor to the right, when all of a sudden you run smack into a pretty face. Woo-woo! You
begin to get weak in the knees. Your head's in a whirl. And then you feel light as a feather, and
before you know it, you're walking on air. And then you know what? You're knocked for a loop, and
you completely lose your head!   Thumper: Gosh, that's awful.


twitter (v.)

late 14c., twiteren, in reference to birds, of imitative origin (compare Old High German zwizziron,
German zwitschern, Danish kvidre, Old Swedish kvitra). The noun meaning condition of tremulous
excitement is attested from 1670s. The microblogging service with the 140-character limit was
introduced in 2006. The following is considered an unrelated word of obscure origin:    TWITTER. 1.
That part of a thread that is spun too small. Yarn is said to be twined to twitters, when twined too
small, S. Hence, to twitter yarn, to spin it unequally, A. Bor. Ray.  2. It is transferred to any
person or thing that is slender or feeble. It is said of a lank delicate girl: She is a mere
twitter, S. [Jamieson, Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language, Edinburgh, 1808]


