trench (n.)

late 14c., track cut through a wood, later long, narrow ditch (late 15c.), from Old French trenche a
slice, cut, gash, slash; defensive ditch (13c., Modern French tranche), from trenchier to cut,
carve, slice, possibly from Vulgar Latin *trincare, from Latin truncare to cut or lop off (see
truncate). Trenches for military protection are first so called c.1500. Trench warfare first
attested 1918. Trench-coat first recorded 1916, a type of coat worn by British officers in the
trenches during World War I.


trencher (n.)

wooden platter on which to cut meat, c.1300, from Anglo-French trenchour, Old North French trencheor
a trencher, literally a cutting place, from Old French trenchier to cut, carve, slice (see trench).


trenchant (adj.)

early 14c., cutting, sharp, from Old French trenchant cutting, sharp (literal and figurative),
present participle of trenchier to cut (see trench). Figurative sense in English is from c.1600.


dike (n.)

Old English dic trench, ditch; an earthwork with a trench; moat, from Proto-Germanic *dik-
(cognates: Old Norse diki ditch, fishpond, Old Frisian dik mound, dam, Middle Dutch dijc mound, dam,
pool, Dutch dijk dam, German Deich embankment), from PIE root *dheigw- to pierce, fasten (cognates:
Sanskrit dehi- wall, Old Persian dida wall, stronghold, fortress, Persian diz).    At first an
excavation, later (late 15c.) applied to the resulting earth mound; a sense development paralleled
by cognate forms in many other languages. This is the northern variant of the word that in the south
of England yielded ditch (n.).


sike (n.)

also syke, small stream, a Scottish and Northern word, from Old English sic or cognate Old Norse sik
a ditch, trench.


retrench (v.1)

1590s, dig a new trench as a second line of defense, 1590s, probably a back-formation from
retrenchment in the military sense. Related: Retrenched; retrenching.


delf (n.)

late Old English d&aelig;lf trench, ditch, quarry, from gedelf digging, a digging, from delfan to
dig (see delve).


sulcate (adj.)

furrowed, grooved, 1760, from Latin sulcatus, past participle of sulcare to make furrowed, from
sulcus furrow, trench, ditch (see sulcus).


entrench (v.)

1550s, implied in intrenched, from en- (1) make, put in + trench. Figurative use is from 1590s.
Related: Entrenched; entrenching.


handbook (n.)

Old English handboc; see hand (n.) + book (N.). It translates Latin manualis, and was displaced in
Middle English by manual (from French), and later in part by enchiridion (from Greek). Reintroduced
1814, but execrated through much of 19c. as that very ugly and very unnecessary word [Trench].


tranche (n.)

c.1500, from French tranche a cutting, from trancher, trencher to cut, Old French trenchier (see
trench). Economic sense is from 1930.


sulcus (n.)

plural sulci, fissure between convolutions of the brain, 1833, from medical use of Latin sulcus
furrow, trench, ditch, wrinkle, apparently literally the result of plowing, from PIE *selk- to pull,
draw (cognates: Greek holkos furrow, Old English sulh plow, Lithuanian velku I draw).


sap (v.1)

dig a trench toward the enemy's position, 1590s, from Middle French saper, from sappe spade, from
Late Latin sappa spade (source also of Italian zappa, Spanish zapa spade). Extended sense weaken or
destroy insidiously is from 1755, probably influenced by the verb form of sap (n.1), on the notion
of draining the vital sap from. Related: Sapped; sapping.


parados (n.)

rear wall of a trench, 1917, earlier elevation behind a fortified place (1853), literally defense
from the back, from French parados, from para- defense (see para- (2)) + dos back (see dossier).


retrench (v.2)

cut off, cut down, pare away (expenses, etc.), 1620s, from obsolete French retrencher to cut off,
lessen, shorten (Modern French retrancher, Old French retrenchier), from re- back (see re-) + Old
French trenchier to cut (see trench). Related: Retrenched; retrenching.


fosse (n.)

early 14c. (late 13c. in place names), ditch, trench, mid-15c., from Old French fosse ditch, grave,
dungeon (12c.), from Latin fossa ditch, in full fossa terra, literally dug earth, from fem. past
participle of fodere to dig (see fossil).    The Fosse-way (early 12c.), one of the four great Roman
roads of Britain, probably was so called from the ditch on either side of it.


furrow (n.)

Old English furh furrow, trench, from Proto-Germanic *furkh- (cognates: Old Frisian furch furrow;
Middle Dutch vore, Dutch voor; German Furche furrow; Old Norse for furrow, drainage ditch), from PIE
*perk- (cognates: Latin porca ridge between two furrows, Old Irish -rech, Welsh rhych furrow). Some
scholars connect this word with Latin porcus, Eng. FARROW, assigning to the common root the sense
'to root like a swine.'  [OED]


schadenfreude (n.)

malicious joy in the misfortunes of others, 1922, German Schadenfreude, literally damage-joy, from
schaden damage, harm, injury (see scathe) + freude, from Old High German frewida joy, from fro
happy, literally hopping for joy, from Proto-Germanic *frawa- (see frolic).What a fearful thing is
it that any language should have a word expressive of the pleasure which men feel at the calamities
of others; for the existence of the word bears testimony to the existence of the thing. And yet in
more than one such a word is found. ... In the Greek epikhairekakia, in the German, 'Schadenfreude.'
[Richard C. Trench, On the Study of Words, 1852]


screw (n.)

cylinder of wood or metal with a spiral ridge round it; hole in which a screw turns, c.1400, from
Middle French escroue nut, cylindrical socket, screwhole, of uncertain etymology; not found in other
Romanic languages. Perhaps via Gallo-Roman *scroba or West Germanic *scruva from Vulgar Latin
scrobis screw-head groove, in classical Latin ditch, trench, also vagina (Diez, though OED finds
this phonologically impossible).    Kluge, Watkins and others trace it to Latin scrofa breeding sow,
perhaps based on the shape of a pig's penis (compare Portuguese porca, Spanish perca a female screw,
from Latin porca sow). Latin scrofa is literally digger, rooter, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut
(see shear (v.)). A group of apparently cognate Germanic words (Middle Low German, Middle Dutch
schruve, Dutch schroef, German Schraube, Swedish skrufva screw) are said to be French loan-words.
Sense of means of pressure or coercion is from 1640s, probably in reference to instruments of
torture (such as thumbscrews). Meaning prison guard, warden is 1812 in underworld slang, originally
in reference to the key they carried (screw as slang for key attested from 1795). Slang meaning an
act of copulation is recorded from 1929 (meaning a prostitute is attested from 1725). To have a
screw loose have a dangerous (usually mental) weakness is recorded from 1810.


