tribute (n.)

mid-14c., stated sum of money or other valuable consideration paid by one ruler or country to
another in acknowledgment of submission or as the price of peace or protection, from Anglo-French
tribute, Old French tribut and directly from Latin tributum tribute, a stated payment, a thing
contributed or paid, noun use of neuter of tributus, past participle of tribuere to pay, assign,
grant, also allot among the tribes or to a tribe, from tribus (see tribe). Sense of offering, gift,
token is first recorded 1580s.


tributary (adj.)

late 14c., paying tribute, from Latin tributarius liable to tax or tribute, from tributum (see
tribute).


geld (n.)

royal tax in medieval England, Old English gield payment, tribute, from Proto-Germanic *geldam
payment (cognates: Middle High German gelt payment, contribution, German geld money, Old Norse gjald
payment, Gothic gild tribute, tax), from PIE root of yield (v.).


guild (n.)

early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi guild, brotherhood), a semantic
fusion of Old English gegyld guild and gild, gyld payment, tribute, compensation, from Proto-
Germanic *gelth- pay (cognates: Old Frisian geld money, Old Saxon geld payment, sacrifice, reward,
Old High German gelt payment, tribute; see yield (v.)).    The connecting sense is of a tribute or
payment to join a protective or trade society. But some see the root in its alternative sense of
sacrifice, as if in worship, and see the word as meaning a combination for religious purposes,
either Christian or pagan. The Anglo-Saxon guilds had a strong religious component; they were burial
societies that paid for masses for the souls of deceased members as well as paying fines in cases of
justified crime. The continental custom of guilds of merchants arrived after the Conquest, with
incorporated societies of merchants in each town or city holding exclusive rights of doing business
there. In many cases they became the governing body of a town (compare Guildhall, which came to be
the London city hall). Trade guilds arose 14c., as craftsmen united to protect their common
interest.


tributary (n.)

late 14c., person, country, etc. owing obedience or paying tribute or a tax to a sovereign or
another people, from Latin tributarius (see tributary (adj.)). Meaning stream that flows into a
larger body is from 1822, from the adjective in this sense, which is recorded from 1610s.


exaction (n.)

late 14c., from French exaction, from Latin exactionem (nominative exactio) a driving out;
supervision; exaction; a tax, tribute, impost, noun of action from past participle stem of exigere
(see exact (adj.)).


release (n.)

early 14c., abatement of distress; means of deliverance, from Old French relais, reles (12c.), a
back-formation from relesser, relaissier (see release (v.)). In law, mid-14c., transferring of
property or a right to another; late 14c. as release from an obligation; remission of a duty,
tribute, etc. Meaning act and manner of releasing (a bow, etc.) is from 1871. Sense of action of
publication is from 1907.


distribution (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French distribution (13c.) and directly from Latin distributionem (nominative
distributio) a division, distribution, noun of action from past participle stem of distribuere deal
out in portions, from dis- individually + tribuere assign, allot (see tribute).


wergeld (n.)

set sum of money as the value of a free man, based on social rank, and paid as compensation for his
murder or injury in discharge of punishment or vengeance, Old English wergeld (Anglian, Kentish),
wergield (West Saxon), from wer man (see virile) + geld payment, tribute (see geld (n.)).


contribution (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contribution and directly from Latin contributionem (nominative
contributio), noun of action from past participle stem of contribuere to bring together, add,
contribute, from com- together (see com-) + tribuere to allot, pay (see tribute).


stipend (n.)

early 15c., periodical payment; soldier's pay, from Latin stipendium tax, impost, tribute, in
military use pay, salary, from stips alms, small payment, contribution of money, gift + pendere
weigh (see pendant). According to Klein's sources, the first element is related to Latin stipes log,
stock, trunk of a tree (see stipe). As a verb from late 15c.


imposition (n.)

late 14c., the levying of taxes, a tax, duty, tribute, from Old French imposicion tax, duty; a
fixing (early 14c.), from Latin impositionem (nominative impositio) a laying on, from imponere to
place upon, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + ponere to put, place (see
position). Sense of the act of putting (something) on (something else) is from 1590s. Meaning an act
or instance of imposing (on someone) first recorded 1630s (see impose).


attribute (v.)

late 14c., assign, bestow, from Latin attributus, past participle of attribuere assign to, add,
bestow; figuratively to attribute, ascribe, impute, from ad- to + tribuere assign, give, bestow (see
tribute). Related: Attributed; attributing.


donation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French donacion (13c.), from Latin donationem (nominative donatio) a
presenting, giving, noun of action from past participle stem of donare give as a gift, from donum
gift, from PIE *donum gift (cognates: Sanskrit danam offering, present, Old Church Slavonic dani
tribute, Lithuanian duonis gift, Old Irish dan gift, endowment, talent, Welsh dawn gift), from root
*do- to give (see date (n.1)).


retribution (n.)

late 14c., repayment, from Old French retribution and directly from Latin retributionem (nominative
retributio) recompense, repayment, noun of action from past participle stem of retribuere hand back,
repay, from re- back (see re-) + tribuere to assign, allot (see tribute). Originally that which is
given in return for past good or evil; restricted modern use of evil given for evil done (1560s) is
from day of retribution (1520s), in Christian theology the time of divine reward or punishment.


gavel (n.)

small mallet used by presiding officers at meetings, 1805, American English, of unknown origin;
perhaps connected with German dialectal gaffel brotherhood, friendly society, from Middle High
German gaffel society, guild, related to Old English gafol tribute, giefan to give (see habit). But
in some sources gavel also is identified as a type of mason's tool, in which case the extended
meaning may be via freemasonry. As a verb, by 1887, from the noun. Old English had tabule wooden
hammer struck as a signal for assembly among monks, an extended sense of table (n.).


change (v.)

early 13c., to substitute one for another; to make (something) other than what it was (transitive);
from late 13c. as to become different (intransitive), from Old French changier to change, alter;
exchange, switch, from Late Latin cambiare to barter, exchange, from Latin cambire to exchange,
barter, of Celtic origin, from PIE root *kemb- to bend, crook (with a sense evolution perhaps from
to turn to to change, to to barter); cognate with Old Irish camm crooked, curved; Middle Irish cimb
tribute, cimbid prisoner; see cant (n.2). Meaning to take off clothes and put on other ones is from
late 15c. Related: Changed; changing. To change (one's) mind is from 1610s.


toll (n.)

tax, fee, Old English toll impost, tribute, passage-money, rent, variant of toln, cognate with Old
Norse tollr, Old Frisian tolen, Old High German zol, German Zoll, probably representing an early
Germanic borrowing from Late Latin tolonium custom house, from Latin telonium tollhouse, from Greek
teloneion tollhouse, from telones tax-collector, from telos tax (see tele-; for sense, compare
finance). On the other theory it is native Germanic and related to tell (v.) on the notion of that
which is counted. Originally in a general sense of payment exacted by an authority; meaning charge
for right of passage along a road is from late 15c.


blackmail (n.)

1550s, from black (adj.) + Middle English male rent, tribute, from Old English mal lawsuit, terms,
bargaining, agreement, from Old Norse mal speech, agreement; related to Old English m&aelig;&eth;el
meeting, council, m&aelig;l speech, Gothic ma&thorn;l meeting place, from Proto-Germanic *mathla-,
from PIE *mod- to meet, assemble (see meet (v.)). From the practice of freebooting clan chieftains
who ran protection rackets against Scottish farmers. Black from the evil of the practice. Expanded
c.1826 to any type of extortion money. Compare silver mail rent paid in money (1590s); buttock-mail
(Scottish, 1530s) fine imposed for fornication.


date (n.1)

time, early 14c., from Old French date (13c.) date, day; time, from Medieval Latin data, noun use of
fem. singular of Latin datus given, past participle of dare to give, grant, offer, from PIE root
*do- to give (cognates: Sanskrit dadati gives, danam offering, present; Old Persian dadatuv let him
give, Old Church Slavonic dati give, dani tribute; Latin donum gift; Greek didomi, didonai, to give,
offer, doron gift; Lithuanian duonis gift, Old Irish dan gift, endowment, talent, Welsh dawn gift).
The Roman convention of closing every article of correspondence by writing given and the day and
month -- meaning perhaps given to messenger -- led to data becoming a term for the time (and place)
stated. (a Roman letter would include something along the lines of datum Romae pridie Kalendas Maias
-- given at Rome on the last day of April.


