tribunal (n.)

early 15c., a judgement seat, from Old French tribunal justice seat, judgement seat (13c.) and
directly from Latin tribunal platform for the seat of magistrates, elevation, embankment, from
tribunus official in ancient Rome, magistrate, literally head of a tribe (see tribune). Hence, a
court of justice or judicial assembly (1580s).


comeuppance (n.)

also comeupance, 1859, presumably rooted in verbal phrase come up present oneself for judgment
before a tribunal + -ance.


Areopagus

1640s, Greek, Areios pagos the hill of Ares, west of the Acropolis in Athens, where the highest
judicial court sat; second element from pagos rocky hill. Sense extended to any important tribunal.


hoosegow (n.)

jail, 1911, western U.S., probably from mispronunciation of Mexican Spanish juzgao tribunal, court,
from juzgar to judge, used as a noun, from Latin judicare to judge, which is related to judicem (see
judge (v.)).


consistory (n.)

c.1300, secular tribunal, from Old North French consistorie (Old French consistoire, 12c.) and
directly from Late Latin consistorium waiting room, meeting place of the imperial council, from
Latin consistere (see consist). Meaning Church council is from early 14c.


tribune (n.)

late 14c., title of an official in ancient Rome, from Latin tribunus magistrate (specifically one of
the officers appointed to protect the rights and interests of the plebeians from the patricians),
originally head of a tribe (in the Roman sense), from tribus (see tribe). Also raised platform
(1762), from Italian tribuna, from Medieval Latin tribuna, from Latin tribunal in its classical
sense platform for the seats of magistrates in ancient Rome.


hustings (n.)

Old English husting meeting, court, tribunal, from Old Norse hus&eth;ing council, from hus house
(see house (n.)) + &eth;ing assembly (see thing); so called because it was a meeting of the men who
formed the household of a nobleman or king. The native Anglo-Saxon word for this was folc-gemot. The
plural became the usual form c.1500; sense of temporary platform for political speeches developed by
1719, apparently from London's Court of Hustings, presided over by the Lord Mayor, which was held on
a platform in the Guildhall. This sense broadened to encompass the whole election process.


amerce (v.)

1215, earlier amercy, Anglo-French amercier to fine, from merci mercy, grace (see mercy). The legal
phrase estre a merci to be at the mercy of (a tribunal, etc.) was corrupted to estre amerci&eacute;
in an example of how a legalese adverbial phrase can become a verb (see abandon). The sense often
was to fine arbitrarily.   Frans hom ne seit amerciez pour petit forfet. [Magna Charta]    Related:
Amercement; amerciable.


roll (v.)

c.1300 turn over and over, move by rotating (intransitive); late 14c. as to move (something) by
turning it over and over; from Old French roeller roll, wheel round (Modern French rouler), from
Medieval Latin rotulare, from Latin rotula, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary). Related: Rolled;
rolling.    Of sounds (such as thunder) somehow suggestive of a rolling ball, 1590s; of a drum from
1680s. Of eyes, from late 14c. Of a movie camera, to start filming, from 1938. Sense of rob a
stuporous drunk is from 1873, from the action required to get to his pockets. To roll up gather,
congregate is from 1861, originally Australian. To be on a roll is from 1976. To roll with the
punches is a metaphor from boxing (1940). Heads will roll is a Hitlerism:If our movement is
victorious there will be a revolutionary tribunal which will punish the crimes of November 1918.
Then decapitated heads will roll in the sand. [1930]


sergeant (n.)

c.1200, servant, from Old French sergent, serjant (domestic) servant, valet; court official;
soldier, from Medieval Latin servientum (nominative serviens) servant, vassal, soldier (in Late
Latin public official), from Latin servientem serving, present participle of servire to serve (see
serve (v.)); cognate with Spanish sirviente, Italian servente; a twin of servant, and 16c. writers
sometimes use the two words interchangeably.    Specific sense of military servant is attested from
late 13c.; that of officer whose duty is to enforce judgments of a tribunal or legislative body is
from c.1300 (sergeant at arms is attested from late 14c.). Meaning non-commissioned military officer
first recorded 1540s. Originally a much more important rank than presently. As a police rank, in
Great Britain from 1839.    Middle English alternative spelling serjeant (from Old French) was
retained in Britain in special use as title of a superior order of barristers (c.1300, from legal
Latin serviens ad legem, one who serves (the king) in matters of law), from which Common Law judges
were chosen; also used of certain other officers of the royal household. sergeant-major is from
1570s. The sergeant-fish (1871) so-called for lateral markings resembling a sergeant's stripes.
Related: Sergeancy.


