trickle (n.)

1570s, from trickle (v.).


trickle (v.)

late 14c., intransitive, of uncertain origin, possibly a shortened variant of stricklen to trickle,
a frequentative form of striken to flow, move (see strike (v.)). Transitive sense from c.1600.
Related: Trickled; trickling. Trickle-down as an adjectival phrase in an economic sense first
recorded 1944; the image had been in use at least since Teddy Roosevelt.


stalagmite (n.)

cone-shaped formation of carbonate of lime on the floor of a cave, 1680s, from Modern Latin
stalagmites (1650s, Olaus Wormius), from Greek stalagmos a dropping, or stalagma a drop, drip, that
which drops, from stalassein to trickle (see stalactite). Related: Stalagmitic; stalagmitical.


seep (v.)

1790, variant of sipe (c.1500), possibly from Old English sipian to seep, from Proto-Germanic *sip-
(cognates: Middle High German sifen, Dutch sijpelen to ooze), from PIE root *seib- to pour out,
drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related: Seeped; seeping.


distill (v.)

also distil, late 14c., from Old French distiller (14c.), from Latin distillare trickle down in
minute drops, from dis- apart (see dis-) + stillare to drip, drop, from stilla drop. Related:
Distilled; distilling.


instill (v.)

also instil, early 15c., to introduce (liquid, feelings, etc.) little by little, from Latin
instillare put in by drops, to drop, trickle, from in- in (see in- (2)) + stilla a drop (see
distill). Related: Instilled; instilling.


stalactite (n.)

hanging formation of carbonite of lime from the roof of a cave, 1670s, Englished from Modern Latin
stalactites (used 1654 by Olaus Wormius), from Greek stalaktos dripping, oozing out in drops, from
stalassein to trickle, from PIE root *stag- to seep, drip, drop (cognates: German stallen,
Lithuanian telziu to urinate) + noun suffix -ite (1). Related: Stalactic; stalactitic.


lack (n.)

c.1300, absence, want; shortage, deficiency, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *lac, or else
borrowed from Middle Dutch lak deficiency, fault; in either case from Proto-Germanic *laka-
(cognates: Old Frisian lek disadvantage, damage, Old Norse lakr lacking), from PIE *leg- to dribble,
trickle (see leak (v.)). Middle English also had lackless without blame or fault.


sieve (n.)

Old English sife sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib (cognates: Middle Dutch seve, Dutch zeef, Old High
German sib, German Sieb), from PIE *seib- to pour out, sieve, drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related
to sift. The Sieve of Eratosthenes (1803) is a contrivance for finding prime numbers. Sieve and
shears formerly were used in divinations.


leak (v.)

to let water in or out [Johnson], late 14c., from Middle Dutch leken to drip, to leak, or from Old
Norse leka, both of them related to Old English leccan to moisten (which did not survive into Middle
English), all from Proto-Germanic *lek- deficiency (cognates: Old High German lecchen to become dry,
German lechzen to be parched with thirst), from PIE root *leg- to dribble, trickle. The figurative
meaning come to be known in spite of efforts at concealment dates from at least 1832; transitive
sense first recorded 1859. Related: Leaked; leaking.


soap (n.)

Old English sape soap, salve (originally a reddish hair dye used by Germanic warriors to give a
frightening appearance), from Proto-Germanic *saipon dripping thing, resin (cognates: Middle Low
German sepe, West Frisian sjippe, Dutch zeep, Old High German seiffa, German seife soap, Old High
German seifar foam, Old English sipian to drip), from PIE *soi-bon-, from root *seib- to pour out,
drip, trickle (cognates: Latin sebum tallow, suet, grease).    Romans and Greeks used oil to clean
skin; the Romance language words for soap (cognates: Italian sapone, French savon, Spanish jabon)
are from Late Latin sapo pomade for coloring the hair (first mentioned in Pliny), which is a
Germanic loan-word, as is Finnish saippua. The meaning flattery is recorded from 1853.


rheum (n.)

mucous discharge, late 14c., from Old French reume a cold (13c., Modern French rhume), from Latin
rheuma, from Greek rheuma discharge from the body, flux; a stream, current, flood, a flowing,
literally that which flows, from rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (cognates: Sanskrit
sravati flows, srotah stream; Avestan thraotah- stream, river, Old Persian rauta river; Greek rheos
a flowing, stream, rhythmos rhythm, rhytos fluid, liquid; Old Irish sruaim, Irish sruth stream,
river; Welsh ffrwd stream; Old Norse straumr, Old English stream, Old High German strom (second
element in maelstrom); Lettish strauma stream, river; Lithuanian sraveti to trickle, ooze; Old
Church Slavonic struja river, o-strovu island, literally that which is surrounded by a river; Polish
strumie&#324; brook).


