nugatory (adj.)

trifling, of no value, c.1600, from Latin nugatorius worthless, trifling, futile, from nugator
jester, trifler, braggart, from nugatus, past participle of nugari to trifle, jest, play the fool,
from nug&aelig; jokes, jests, trifles, of unknown origin.


potter (v.)

occupy oneself in a trifling way, 1740, earlier to poke again and again (1520s), frequentative of
obsolete verb poten to push, poke, from Old English potian to push (see put (v.)). Sense of occupy
oneself in a trifling way is first recorded 1740. Related: Pottered; pottering.


piddling (adj.)

insignificant, trifling, 1550s, past participle adjective from piddle (v.).


small beer (n.)

1560s, originally weak beer; used figuratively of small things or trifling matters. Small with the
meaning of low alcoholic content is attested from mid-15c.


minim (n.)

mid-15c., in music, from Latin minimus smallest, least; minute, trifling, insignificant; of time,
least, shortest, very short; of age, youngest; as a noun, least price, lowest price (see minimum).
Calligraphy sense is from c.1600.


piddle (v.)

1540s, to peddle, to work in a trifling way, of uncertain origin, apparently a frequentative form.
Meaning to pick at one's food is from 1610s; that of urinate is from 1796. Related: Piddled;
piddler; piddling.


tomfoolery (n.)

foolish trifling, 1812, from tomfool + -ery.


trifle (v.)

treat lightly, 1520s, from trifle (n.). Earlier cheat, mock (c.1300). Related: Trifled; trifling.


scare (n.)

something that frightens; sudden panic, sudden terror inspired by a trifling cause, false alarm,
1520s, alteration of Middle English sker fear, dread (c.1400), from scare (v.). Scare tactic
attested from 1948.


frivolous (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin frivolus silly, empty, trifling, worthless, brittle, diminutive of *frivos
broken, crumbled, from friare break, rub away, crumble. Related: Frivolously; frivolousness.


jest (v.)

1520s, to speak in a trifling manner; 1550s, to joke, from Middle English gesten recite a tale (late
14c.), from geste (see jest (n.)). Related: Jested; jesting.


sermonette (n.)

1814, diminutive from sermon + -ette. Poe used sermonoid (1849); sermuncle (1886) also has been
tried. English writers have turned to the Italian double diminutive sermonettino (1818) to describe
notably trifling efforts.


quiddity (n.)

a trifling nicety in argument, a quibble, 1530s, from Medieval Latin quidditas the essence of
things, in Scholastic philosophy, that which distinguishes a thing from other things, literally
whatness, from Latin quid what, neuter of indefinite pronoun quis somebody, someone or other (see
who). Sense developed from scholastic disputes over the nature of things. Original classical meaning
real essence or nature of a thing is attested in English from late 14c.


gossip (n.)

Old English godsibb sponsor, godparent, from God + sibb relative (see sibling). Extended in Middle
English to any familiar acquaintance (mid-14c.), especially to woman friends invited to attend a
birth, later to anyone engaging in familiar or idle talk (1560s). Sense extended 1811 to trifling
talk, groundless rumor. Similar formations in Old Norse gu&eth;sifja, Old Saxon gu&thorn;ziff.


tenuous (adj.)

1590s, thin, unsubstantial, irregularly formed from Latin tenuis thin, drawn out, meager, slim,
slender, figuratively trifling, insignificant, poor, low in rank, from PIE root *ten- to stretch
(cognates: Sanskrit tanuh thin, literally stretched out; see tenet) + -ous. The correct form with
respect to the Latin is tenuious. The figurative sense of having slight importance, not substantial
is found from 1817 in English. Related: Tenuously; tenuousness.


petit (adj.)

mid-14c., trifling, from Old French petit small, little, young, few in numbers (11c.), probably from
stem of Late Latin pitinnus small, of uncertain origin; it corresponds to no known Latin form and
perhaps is from a Celtic root pett- part, piece, bit also found in Italian pezza, English piece.
Attested as a surname from 1086. Replaced by petty in most usages, except in established forms such
as petit bourgeois conventional middle-class (1832; used in English by Charlotte Bront&#235; earlier
than by Marx or Engels); petit mal (1842, literally little evil, mild form of epilepsy), and petit
four (1884), which in French means little oven, from Old French four oven, from Latin furnus.


light (adj.1)

not heavy, from Old English leoht not heavy, light in weight; easy, trifling; quick, agile, from
Proto-Germanic *lingkhtaz (cognates: Old Norse lettr, Swedish l&auml;tt, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
licht, German leicht, Gothic leihts), from PIE root *legwh- not heavy, having little weight
(cognates: Latin levis light, Old Irish lu small; see lever).    The notion in make light of (1520s)
is of unimportance. Alternative spelling lite, the darling of advertisers, is first recorded 1962.
The adverb is Old English leohte, from the adjective. Light-skirts woman of easy virtue is attested
from 1590s. To make light of is from 1520s.


trivial (adj.)

ordinary (1580s); insignificant, trifling (1590s), from Latin trivialis common, commonplace, vulgar,
literally of or belonging to the crossroads, from trivium place where three roads meet, in
transferred use, an open place, a public place, from tri- three (see three) + via road (see via).
The sense connection is public, hence common, commonplace.    The earliest use of the word in
English was early 15c., a separate borrowing in the academic sense of the trivium (the first three
liberal arts -- grammar, rhetoric, and logic); from Medieval Latin use of trivialis in the sense of
the first three liberal arts, from trivium, neuter of the Latin adjective trivius of three roads, of
the crossroads. Related: Trivially. For sense evolution to pertaining to useless information, see
trivia.


slight (adj.)

early 14c., flat, smooth; hairless, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse slettr
smooth, sleek, from Proto-Germanic *slikhtaz (cognates: Old Saxon slicht; Low German slicht smooth,
plain common; Old English -sliht level, attested in eor&eth;slihtes level with the ground; Old
Frisian sliucht smooth, slight, Middle Dutch sleht even, plain, Old High German sleht, Gothic
slaihts smooth), probably from a collateral form of PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from
root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)).    Sense evolution probably is from smooth (c.1300), to slim,
slender; of light texture, hence not good or strong; insubstantial, trifling, inferior,
insignificant (early 14c.). Meaning small in amount is from 1520s. Sense of German cognate schlecht
developed from smooth, plain, simple to bad, mean, base, and as it did it was replaced in the
original senses by schlicht, a back-formation from schlichten to smooth, to plane, a derivative of
schlecht in the old sense [Klein].


straw (n.)

Old English streaw (rare) stems or stalks of certain species of grains, apparently literally that
which is scattered or strewn, related to streowian (see strew), from Proto-Germanic *strawam that
which is scattered (cognates: Old Norse stra, Danish straa, Swedish str&#229;, Old Saxon stro, Old
Frisian stre, Old Dutch, Old High German stro, Dutch stroo, German Stroh straw), from PIE *stere- to
spread (see structure (n.)). The notion perhaps is of dried grain stalks strewn on a floor as
carpeting or bedding.    As a type of what is trifling or unimportant, attested from late 13c.
Meaning hollow tube through which a drink is sucked is recorded from 1851. To draw straws as a means
of deciding something is recorded from 1779 (the custom probably is older). As an adjective, made of
straw, mid-15c.; hence false, sham. Straw poll is from 1932; earlier straw vote (1866). Straw hat
first attested mid-15c. To clutch (or grasp or catch) at straws (1748) is what a drowning man
proverbially would do. The last straw (1836 apart from the full phrase) is from the proverbial
image: it is the last straw that breaks the camel's back (or, less often, the mare's, the horse's,
or the elephant's), an image in use in English by 1755.    Let it not, however, be inferred that
taxation cannot be pushed too far : it is, as the Oriental proverb says, the last straw that
overloads the camel ; a small addition, if ill-timed, may overturn the whole. [The Scots Magazine,
April 1799]


small (adj.)

Old English sm&aelig;l thin, slender, narrow; fine, from Proto-Germanic *smal- small animal; small
(cognates: Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish, Middle Dutch, Dutch, Old High German smal, Old Frisian smel,
German schmal narrow, slender, Gothic smalista smallest, Old Norse smali small cattle, sheep),
perhaps from a PIE root *(s)melo- smaller animal (cognates: Greek melon, Old Irish mil a small
animal; Old Church Slavonic malu bad). Original sense of narrow now almost obsolete, except in
reference to waistline and intestines.    My sister ... is as white as a lilly, and as small as a
wand. [Shakespeare, Two Gentlemen of Verona, 1591]    Sense of not large, of little size developed
in Old English. Of children, young, from mid-13c. Meaning inferior in degree or amount is from late
13c. Meaning trivial, unimportant is from mid-14c. Sense of having little property or trade is from
1746. That of characterized by littleness of mind or spirit, base, low, mean is from 1824. As an
adverb by late 14c.  Small fry, first recorded 1690s of little fish, 1885 of insignificant people.
Small potatoes no great matter first attested 1924; small change something of little value is from
1902; small talk chit-chat, trifling conversation (1751) first recorded in Chesterfield's Letters.
Small world as a comment upon an unexpected meeting of acquaintances is recorded from 1895. Small-
arms, indicating those capable of being carried in the hand (contrasted to ordnance) is recorded
from 1710.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


