trifle (v.)

treat lightly, 1520s, from trifle (n.). Earlier cheat, mock (c.1300). Related: Trifled; trifling.


trifle (n.)

c.1200, trufle false or idle tale, later matter of little importance (c.1300), from Old French
trufle mockery, diminutive of truffe deception, of uncertain origin. As a type of light confection
from 1755.


bagatelle (n.)

1630s, a trifle, from French bagatelle knick-knack, bauble, trinket (16c.), from Italian bagatella a
trifle, diminutive of Latin baca berry. As a piece of light music, it is attested from 1827.


footle (v.)

to trifle, 1892, from dialectal footer to trifle, footy mean, paltry (1752), perhaps from French se
foutre to care nothing, from Old French foutre to copulate with, from Latin futuere, originally to
strike, thrust (see confute). But OED derives the English dialect words from foughty (c.1600), from
Dutch vochtig or Danish fugtig damp, musty; related to fog (n.).


hilum (n.)

Latin, literally little thing, shred, trifle. Related: Hilar.


fiddle-faddle

1570s (n.); 1630s (v.), apparently a reduplication of obsolete faddle to trifle.


falderol (n.)

also falderal, folderol, 1701, nonsense refrain in songs; meaning gewgaw, trifle is attested from
1820.


piffle (v.)

1847, of unknown origin, perhaps an alteration of trifle, by influence of piddle, etc. Or perhaps
imitative of a puff of air, with a diminutive suffix. As a noun by 1890.


fad (n.)

1834, hobby, pet project; 1881 as fashion, craze, perhaps shortened from fiddle-faddle. Or perhaps
from French fadaise trifle, nonsense, ultimately from Latin fatuus stupid.


toy (v.)

deal carelessly (with), trifle, 1520s, from toy (n.) in its older sense.    If he be merie and toy
with any,  His wife will frowne, and words geve manye.  [Song of the Bachelor's Life, 16c.]
Related: Toyed; toying.


whimwham (n.)

whimsical device, trifle, 1520s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Old Norse
hvima to let the eyes wander, Norwegian kvima to flutter), or else an arbitrary native formation
(compare flim-flam).


gimcrack (n.)

1610s, showy person; sense of trifle first recorded 1839; of uncertain origin, perhaps alteration of
gibecrake, a kind of ornament on wooden furniture (mid-14c.), perhaps from Old French giber to
rattle, shake + Middle English crak sharp noise, crack. In 18c.-19c. it also meant a person who has
a turn for mechanical contrivances.


nil (n.)

nothing, 1833, from Latin nil, contraction of nihil, nihilum nothing, not at all; in vain, from ne-
not (see un-) + hilum small thing, trifle, of unknown origin.


nugatory (adj.)

trifling, of no value, c.1600, from Latin nugatorius worthless, trifling, futile, from nugator
jester, trifler, braggart, from nugatus, past participle of nugari to trifle, jest, play the fool,
from nug&aelig; jokes, jests, trifles, of unknown origin.


burlesque (n.)

1660s, derisive imitation, grotesque parody, from French burlesque (16c.), from Italian burlesco,
from burla joke, fun, mockery, possibly ultimately from Late Latin burra trifle, nonsense, literally
flock of wool. Modern sense of variety show featuring striptease is American English, 1870.
Originally (1857) the sketches at the end of minstrel shows. As a verb, from 1670s.


twiddle (v.)

1540s, to trifle, of unknown origin, said to be probably imitative; of the fingers, to twirl idly,
first recorded 1670s. Figurative phrase twiddle one's thumbs have nothing to do is recorded from
1846; to twirl one's thumbs in the same sense is recorded from 1816. Related: Twiddled; twiddling.


toy (n.)

c.1300, amorous playing, sport, later piece of fun or entertainment (c.1500), thing of little value,
trifle (1520s), and thing for a child to play with (1580s). Of uncertain origin, and there may be
more than one word here. Compare Middle Dutch toy, Dutch tuig tools, apparatus; stuff, trash, in
speeltuig play-toy, plaything; German Zeug stuff, matter, tools, Spielzeug plaything, toy; Danish
t&oslash;i, Swedish tyg stuff, gear. Applied as an adjective to things of diminutive size,
especially dogs, from 1806. Toy-boy is from 1981.


doodle (v.)

scrawl aimlessly, 1935, from dialectal doodle, dudle fritter away time, trifle, or associated with
dawdle. It was a noun meaning simple fellow from 1620s.    LONGFELLOW: That's a name we made up back
home for people who make foolish designs on paper when they're thinking. It's called doodling.
Almost everybody's a doodler. Did you ever see a scratch pad in a telephone booth? People draw the
most idiotic pictures when they're thinking. Dr. Von Holler, here, could probably think up a long
name for it, because he doodles all the time. [Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, screenplay by Robert Riskin,
1936; based on Opera Hat, serialized in American Magazine beginning May 1935, by Clarence Aldington
Kelland]    Related: Doodled; Doodling.    Doodle Sack. A bagpipe. Dutch. -- Also the private parts
of a woman. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


song (n.)

Old English sang voice, song, art of singing; metrical composition adapted for singing, psalm, poem,
from Proto-Germanic *sangwaz (cognates: Old Norse s&ouml;ngr, Norwegian song, Swedish s&#229;ng, Old
Saxon, Danish, Old Frisian, Old High German, German sang, Middle Dutch sanc, Dutch zang, Gothic
saggws), from PIE *songwh-o- singing, song, from *sengwh- to sing, make an incantation (see sing
(v.)).    Phrase for a song for a trifle, for little or nothing is from All's Well III.ii.9 (the
identical image, por du son, is in Old French. With a song in (one's) heart feeling joy is first
attested 1930 in Lorenz Hart's lyric. Song and dance as a form of vaudeville act is attested from
1872; figurative sense of rigmarole is from 1895.


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


