trim (n.)

state of being prepared, 1580s, nautical jargon, fit for sailing, from trim (v.). From 1570s as
ornament, decoration; the meaning visible woodwork of a house is recorded from 1884; sense of
ornamental additions to an automobile is from 1922. Slang meaning a woman regarded as a sex object
is attested from 1955, American English.


trim (adj.)

c.1500, neatly or smartly dressed, probably ultimately from trim (v.) or from related Old English
trum firm, fixed, secure, strong, sound, vigorous, active. Related: Trimly; trimness.


trim (v.)

mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite;
set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong, from trum strong, stable, from Proto-
Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of *deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Examples in Middle English are wanting.    Original sense is preserved in nautical phrase in
fighting trim (see trim (n.)); where the verb meant distribute the load of a ship so she floats on
an even keel (1570s). Meaning make neat by cutting is first recorded 1520s; that of decorate, adorn
is from 1540s. Sense of reduce is attested from 1966.


trimmings (n.)

adornments, accessories, etc., 1610s, from trim (v.).


trimmer (n.)

1550s, one who trims, agent noun from trim (v.). Meaning one who changes opinions, actions, etc. to
suit circumstances is from 1680s, from the verb in the nautical sense of adjust the balance of sails
or yards with reference to the wind's direction (1620s).


dinky (adj.)

1788 neat, trim, dainty, small, from Scottish dialectal dink finely dressed, trim (c.1500), of
unknown origin. Modern sense is 1850s.


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


tosh (adj.)

neat, clean, trim, 1776, Scottish, of unknown origin.


preen (v.)

to trim, to dress up, late 14c., perhaps a variation of Middle English proynen, proinen trim the
feather with the beak (see prune (v.)); or perhaps from Old French poroindre anoint before, and Old
French proignier round off, prune. Middle English prene (from Old English preon, a general Germanic
word) meant to pin, and probably influenced the form of this word. Watkins, however, connects it
with Latin unguere to smear, anoint.    Because of the popularity of falconry, bird activities
formerly were more closely observed and words for them were more precise in English than today.Youre
hawke proynith and not pikith and she prenyth not bot whan she begynnyth at hir leggys, and fetcheth
moystour like oyle at hir taill. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


rattan

1650s, from Malay rotan, from raut to trim, strip, peel, pare.


poll (v.2)

to cut, trim, late 14c., to cut short the hair (of an animal or person), from poll (n.). Of trees or
plants from 1570s. Related: Polled; polling.


spruce (v.)

to make trim or neat, 1590s, from spruce (adj.). Related: Spruced; sprucing.


trig (adj.)

smart, trim, c.1200, from Old Norse tryggr firm, trusty, true, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (see
true (adj.)). A Scottish and northern word only until 19c. Related: Trigness.


furrier (n.)

late 13c., furrere, via Anglo-French, from Old French forreor, from fourrer to line or trim with
fur.


smarten (v.)

to make smart, to spruce up, to improve appearance, 1786, from smart (adj.) in its sense of spruce,
trim + -en (1). Related: Smartened; smartening.


fettle (n.)

condition, state, trim, c.1750, Lancashire dialect, from fettle (v.) to make ready, arrange (14c.),
perhaps from Old English fetel a girdle, belt, from Proto-Germanic *fatilaz (cognates: German fessel
fetter, chain, Old Norse fetill strap, brace), from PIE *ped- (2) container (see vat).


net (adj.)

remaining after deductions, 1510s, from earlier sense of trim, elegant, clean, neat (c.1300), from
Old French net clean, pure, from Latin nitere to shine, look bright, glitter (see neat). Meaning
influenced by Italian netto remaining after deductions. As a noun, 1910.


circumcision (n.)

late 12c., from Latin circumcisionem (nominative circumcisio), noun of action from past participle
stem of circumcidere to cut around; cut, clip, trim, from circum around (see circum-) + caedere to
cut (see -cide).


impute (v.)

early 15c., from Old French imputer (14c.) and directly from Latin imputare to reckon, make account
of, charge, ascribe, from assimilated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + putare reckon, clear up,
trim, prune, settle (see pave). Related: Imputed; imputing.


circumcise (v.)

mid-13c., to cut off the foreskin, from Old French circoncisier circumcise (12c., Modern French
circoncire), from Latin circumcisus, past participle of circumcidere to cut round, to cut trim, to
cut off (see circumcision). Related: Circumcised; circumcising.


putative (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French putatif, from Late Latin putativus supposed, from Latin putat-, past
participle stem of putare to judge, suppose, believe, suspect, originally to clean, trim, prune (see
pave). At first especially in putative marriage, one which, though legally invalid, was contracted
in good faith by at least one party. Related: Putatively.


snug (adj.)

1590s, compact, trim (of a ship), especially protected from the weather, perhaps from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse snoggr short-haired, Old Swedish snygg, Old Danish sn&oslash;g neat, tidy,
perhaps from PIE *kes- (1) to scratch (see xyster). Sense of in a state of ease or comfort first
recorded 1620s. Meaning fit closely is first found 1838. Expression snug as a bug in a rug attested
by 1769; earlier snug as a bee in a box (1706).


perk (v.)

late 14c., to make oneself trim or smart, perhaps from Old North French perquer to perch (Modern
French percher; see perch (n.1)), on notion of a bird preening its plumage. Sense of raise oneself
briskly is first attested 1520s; perk up recover liveliness is from 1650s. Related: Perked; perking.


lace (v.)

c.1200, fasten (clothing, etc.) with laces and ties, from Old French lacier, from laz (see lace
(n.)). Also tighten (a garment) by pulling its laces (early 14c.). To lace coffee, etc., with a dash
of liquor (1670s) originally was used of sugar, and comes via the notion of to ornament or trim.
Related: Laced; lacing. Laced mutton was an old word for a whore [Johnson].


debauch (v.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;baucher entice from work or duty, from Old French desbaucher to
lead astray, supposedly literally to trim (wood) to make a beam (from bauch beam, from Frankish balk
or some other Germanic source akin to English balk (n.)). A sense of shaving something away,
perhaps, but the root is also said to be a word meaning workshop, which gets toward the notion of to
lure someone off the job; either way the sense evolution is unclear.


retail (v.)

mid-14c. sell in small quantities or parcels, from Old French retaillier cut back, cut off, pare,
clip, reduce, circumcise, from re- back (see re-) + taillier to cut, trim (see tailor (n.)).
Sometimes also to deal out (information, etc.) in small quantities; hand down by report; recount,
tell over again (1590s). Related: Retailed; retailing.


amputation (n.)

1610s, a cutting off of tree branches, a pruning, also operation of cutting off a limb, etc., of a
body, from Middle French amputation or directly from Latin amputationem (nominative amputatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of amputare cut off, lop off; cut around, to prune, from am(bi)-
about (see ambi-) + putare to prune, trim (see pave).


chip (v.)

early 15c., to chip (intransitive, of stone); from Old English forcippian to pare away by cutting,
cut off, verbal form of cipp small piece of wood (see chip (n.)). Transitive meaning to cut up, cut
or trim is from late 15c. Sense of break off fragments is 18c. To chip in contribute (1861) is
American English, perhaps from card-playing. Related: Chipped; chipping. Chipped beef attested from
1826.


mangonel (n.)

military engine for hurling stones, mid-13c., from Old French mangonel catapult, war engine for
throwing stones, etc. (Modern French mangonneau), diminutive of Medieval Latin mangonum, from Vulgar
Latin *manganum machine, from Greek manganon any means of tricking or bewitching, from PIE *mang- to
embellish, dress, trim (cognates: Old Prussian manga whore, Middle Irish meng craft, deception).
Attested from c.1200 in Anglo-Latin.


smart (adj.)

late Old English smeart painful, severe, stinging; causing a sharp pain, related to smeortan (see
smart (v.)). Meaning executed with force and vigor is from c.1300. Meaning quick, active, clever is
attested from c.1300, from the notion of cutting wit, words, etc., or else keen in bargaining.
Meaning trim in attire first attested 1718, ascending from the kitchen to the drawing-room c.1880
[Weekley]. For sense evolution, compare sharp (adj.).    In reference to devices, the sense of
behaving as though guided by intelligence (as in smart bomb) first attested 1972. Smarts good sense,
intelligence, is first recorded 1968. Smart cookie is from 1948.


shelter (n.)

1580s, structure affording protection, possibly an alteration of Middle English sheltron, sheldtrume
roof or wall formed by locked shields, from Old English scyldtruma, from scield shield (see shield
(n.)) + truma troop, related to Old English trum firm, strong (see trim).    If so, the original
notion is of a compact body of men protected by interlocking shields. OED finds this untenable and
proposed derivation from shield + -ture. Figurative sense is recorded from 1580s; meaning temporary
lodging for homeless poor is first recorded 1890 in Salvation Army jargon; sense of temporary home
for animals is from 1971. Related: Shelterless.


pedal (n.)

1610s, lever (on an organ) worked by foot, from French p&eacute;dale feet, trick with the feet, from
Italian pedale treadle, pedal, from Late Latin pedale (thing) of the foot, neuter of Latin pedalis
of the foot, from pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)).    Extended to various mechanical
contrivances by 1789. Pedal steel guitar is from 1969. Pedal-pushers type of women's trousers
suitable for bicycling is from 1944.    When college girls took to riding bicycles in slacks, they
first rolled up one trouser leg, then rolled up both. This whimsy has now produced a trim variety of
long shorts, called pedal pushers. [Life, Aug. 28, 1944]


redd (v.)

early 15c., to clear (a space, etc.), from Old English hreddan to save, free from, deliver, recover,
rescue, from Proto-Germanic *hradjan. Sense evolution tended to merge with unrelated rid. Also
possibly influenced by Old English r&aelig;dan to arrange, related to Old English ger&aelig;de,
source of ready (adj.).    A dialect word in Scotland and northern England, where it has had senses
of to fix (boundaries), to comb (hair), to separate (combatants), to settle (a quarrel). The
exception to the limited use is the meaning to put in order, to make neat or trim (1718), especially
in redd up, which is in general use in England and the U.S. Use of the same phrase, in the same
sense, in Pennsylvania Dutch may be from cognate Low German and Dutch redden, obviously connected
historically to the English word, but the origin and relationship of the forms is not clear [OED].


prune (v.)

early 15c., prouyne, from Old French proignier cut back (vines), prune (Modern French provigner), of
unknown origin. Perhaps [Watkins] from Gallo-Roman *pro-retundiare cut in a rounded shape in front,
from pro- forth (see pro-) + *retundiare round off, from Latin rotundus (see round (adj.)). Klein
suggests the Old French word is from provain layer of a vine, from Latin propago (see prop (n.1)).
Or the Middle English word might be identical with the falconry term proinen, proynen trim the
feather with the beak (late 14c.), source of preen [Barnhart]. Related: Pruned; pruning. Pruning
hook is from 1610s; pruning knife from 1580s.


neat (adj.)

1540s, clean, free from dirt, from Anglo-French neit, Middle French net clear, pure (12c.), from
Latin nitidus well-favored, elegant, trim, literally gleaming, from nitere to shine, from PIE root
*nei- to shine (cognates: Middle Irish niam gleam, splendor, niamda shining; Old Irish noib holy,
niab strength; Welsh nwyfiant gleam, splendor).    Meaning inclined to be tidy is from 1570s. Of
liquor, straight, c.1800, from meaning unadulterated (of wine), which is first attested 1570s.
Informal sense of very good first recorded 1934 in American English; variant neato is teenager
slang, first recorded 1968. Related: Neatly; neatness.


schmuck (n.)

also shmuck, contemptible person, 1892, from East Yiddish shmok, literally penis, probably from Old
Polish smok grass snake, dragon, and likely not the same word as German Schmuck jewelry, adornments,
which is related to Low German smuck supple, tidy, trim, elegant, and to Old Norse smjuga slip, step
through (see smock).    In Jewish homes, the word was regarded as so vulgar as to be taboo [Leo
Rosten, The Joys of Yiddish, 1968] and Lenny Bruce wrote that saying it on stage got him arrested on
the West Coast by a Yiddish undercover agent who had been placed in the club several nights running
to determine if my use of Yiddish terms was a cover for profanity. Euphemized as schmoe, which was
the source of Al Capp's cartoon strip creature the shmoo.    [A]dditional associative effects from
German schmuck 'jewels, decoration' cannot be excluded (cross-linguistically commonplace slang: cf.
Eng. 'family jewels') [Mark R.V. Southern, Contagious Couplings: Transmission of Expressives in
Yiddish Echo Phrases, 2005]. But the English phrase refers to the testicles and is a play on words,
the family element being the essential ones. Words for decoration seem not to be among the
productive sources of European penis slang terms.


