trinket (n.)

1530s, of unknown origin. Evidently a diminutive form, perhaps related to trick (n.).


bauble (n.)

showy trinket or ornament, early 14c., from Old French baubel child's toy, trinket, probably a
reduplication of bel, from Latin bellus pretty (see bene-). Or else related to babe, baby.


bagatelle (n.)

1630s, a trifle, from French bagatelle knick-knack, bauble, trinket (16c.), from Italian bagatella a
trifle, diminutive of Latin baca berry. As a piece of light music, it is attested from 1827.


bibelot (n.)

small curio, 1873, from French bibelot knick-knack, from Old French beubelet trinket, jewel (12c.),
from belbel plaything, a reduplication of bel pretty.


ornament (n.)

early 13c., an accessory, from Old French ornement ornament, decoration, and directly from Latin
ornamentum apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration, trinket, from ornare equip,
adorn (see ornate). Meaning decoration, embellishment in English is attested from late 14c. (also a
secondary sense in classical Latin). Figurative use from 1550s.


gaud (n.)

late 14c., jest, joke, prank, trick; also fraud, deception, trick, artifice. Also large, ornamental
bead in a rosary (mid-14c.); a bauble, trinket, plaything (mid-15c.). In some senses, from gaudy
(n.) (see gaudy). In some, from Latin gaudium joy, gaude rejoice thou (in hymns), or from Old French
gaudie, noun of action from gaudir. As a verb, to furnish with gauds, from late 14c. Related:
Gauded; gauding.


medal (n.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;daille (15c.), from Italian medaglia a medal, according to OED
from Vulgar Latin *metallea (moneta) metal (coin), from Latin metallum (see metal). The other theory
[Klein, Barnhart, Watkins] is that medaglia originally meant coin worth half a denarius, and is from
Vulgar Latin *medalia, from Late Latin medialia little halves, neuter plural of medialis of the
middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally a trinket or charm; as a reward for merit, proficiency, etc.,
attested from 1751.


charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


