trite (adj.)

used till so common as to have lost its novelty and interest, 1540s, from Latin tritus worn, oft-
trodden, of language much-used, familiar, commonplace, past participle adjective from terere to rub,
wear down (see throw (v.)). Related: Tritely; triteness.


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


mooreeffoc (n.)

coffee-room, viewed from the inside through a glass door, as it was seen by Dickens on a dark London
day; ... used by Chesterton to denote the queerness of things that have become trite, when they are
seen suddenly from a new angle. [J.R.R. Tolkien]


hackneyed (adj.)

1769, kept for hire, past participle adjective from hackney. The figurative sense of trite, so
overused as to have become uninteresting is older, 1749, from hack (n.2) in special sense of one who
writes anything for hire.


bromide (n.)

compound of bromine and another metal or radical, 1836, from bromine, the pungent, poisonous
element, + -ide. Used as a sedative; figurative sense of dull, conventional person or trite saying
popularized by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951) in his book Are You a Bromide? (1906).
Related: Bromidic.


cliche (n.)

1825, electrotype, stereotype, from French clich&eacute;, a technical word in printer's jargon for
stereotype block, noun use of past participle of clicher to click (18c.), supposedly echoic of the
sound of a mold striking molten metal. Figurative extension to trite phrase, worn-out expression is
first attested 1888, following the course of stereotype. Related: Cliched (1928).


stale (adj.)

early 13c., freed from dregs or lees (of ale, wine, etc.), probably literally having stood long
enough to clear, ultimately from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet); probably via Old French estal
placed, fixed position, from Frankish *stal- position (see stall (n.1)). Cognate with Middle Dutch
stel stale (of beer and old urine). Originally a desirable quality (in beer and wine); the meaning
not fresh is first recorded late 15c. Figurative sense (of immaterial things) old and trite,
hackneyed is recorded from 1560s. As a noun, that which has become tasteless by exposure, hence a
prostitute (in Shakespeare, etc.). Related: Staleness.


