trough (n.)

Old English trog wooden vessel, tray, hollow vessel, canoe, from Proto-Germanic *trugaz (cognates:
Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Old Norse trog, Middle Dutch troch, Dutch trog, Old High German troc, German
trog), from PIE *dru-ko-, from root *dru-, *deru- wood, tree (see tree (n.)). Originally pronounced
in English with a hard -gh- (as in Scottish loch); pronunciation shifted to -ff, but spelling
remained.


pyelo-

before vowels pyel-, medical word-forming element, 19c., from comb. form of Greek pyelos oblong
trough, bathing-tub, used for pelvis.


shute (n.)

1790, channel, trough, dialectal combination of chute and shoot (n.1).


dinghy (n.)

1810, from Hindi dingi small boat, perhaps from Sanskrit drona-m wooden trough, related to dru-s
wood, tree (see tree (n.)). The spelling with -h- is to indicate a hard -g-.


alveolus (n.)

1706, from Latin alveolus a tray, trough, basin; bed of a small river, diminutive of alvus belly,
stomach, paunch, bowels; hold of a ship, from PIE *aulo- hole, cavity (cognates: Greek aulos tube,
pipe, Old Church Slavonic uliji, Lithuanian aulys beehive (hollow trunk), Armenian yli pregnant).


estaminet (n.)

1814, from French, a caf&eacute; in which smoking is allowed (17c.), of unknown origin; some suggest
a connection to French estamine, a type of open woolen fabric used for making sieves, etc., from
Latin stamineus made of thread. Or [Watkins] from Walloon stamen post to which a cow is tied at a
feeding trough, from Proto-Germanic *stamniz (see stem (n.)). For the excrescent e-, see e-.


scaphoid (adj.)

1741, from Modern Latin scaphoides boat-shaped, from Greek skaphoeides, with -oeides (see -oid) +
skaphe light boat, skiff; also basin, trough, a bowl; literally thing dug or cut out, from PIE
*skabh-, from root *(s)kep- to cut (see scabies). Related: Scaphoidal (1680s).


jerk (n.2)

tedious and ineffectual person, 1935 (the lyric in Big Rock Candy Mountain apparently is Where they
hung the Turk [not jerk] that invented work), American English carnival slang, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps from jerkwater town (1878), where a steam locomotive crew had to take on boiler water from a
trough or a creek because there was no water tank [Barnhart, OED]. This led 1890s to an adjectival
use of jerk as inferior, insignificant. Alternatively, or influenced by, verbal phrase jerk off
masturbate [Rawson].


chute (n.1)

1725, American English, fall of water (earlier shoot, 1610s), from French chute fall, from Old
French cheoite a fall, fem. past participle of cheoir to fall, from Latin cadere (see case (n.1)).
Meaning inclined tube, trough is from 1804; that of narrow passage for cattle, etc. first recorded
1881. In North America, absorbing some senses of similar-sounding shoot (n.1).


gutter (n.)

late 13c., watercourse, water drainage channel along the side of a street, from Anglo-French gotere,
Old French guitere, goutiere (13c., Modern French goutti&egrave;re) gutter, spout (of water), from
goute a drop, from Latin gutta a drop. Meaning furrow made by running water is from 1580s. Meaning
trough under the eaves of a roof to carry off rainwater is from mid-14c. Figurative sense of low,
profane is from 1818. In printers' slang, from 1841.


broom (n.)

Old English brom broom, brushwood, the common flowering shrub whose twigs were tied together to make
a tool for sweeping, from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;maz thorny bush (cognates: Dutch braam, German
Brombeere blackberry), from PIE root *bh(e)rem- to project, a point.    Traditionally, both the
flowers and sweeping with broom twigs were considered unlucky in May (Suffolk, Sussex, Wiltshire,
etc.). The witch's flying broomstick originally was one among many such objects (pitchfork, trough,
bowl), but the broomstick became fixed as the popular tool of supernatural flight via engravings
from a famous Lancashire witch trial of 1612.


lave (v.)

c.1200, from Old English gelafian wash by pouring, pour (water), possibly an early English or West
Germanic borrowing (compare Dutch laven, German laben) of Latin lavare to wash, or its Old French
descendant, laver. Latin lavare is from PIE *leu(e)- to wash (cognates: Latin luere to wash, Greek
louein to wash, bathe, Old Irish loathar basin, Breton laouer trough, Old English lea&thorn;or
lather).


gulf (n.)

late 14c., profound depth; geographic sense is c.1400; from Old French golf a gulf, whirlpool, from
Italian golfo a gulf, a bay, from Late Latin colfos, from Greek kolpos bay, gulf, earlier trough
between waves, fold of a garment, originally bosom, the common notion being curved shape, from PIE
*kwelp- to arch, to vault (compare Old English hwealf, a-hwielfan to overwhelm). Latin sinus
underwent the same development, being used first for bosom, later for gulf. Replaced Old English
s&aelig;-earm. Figurative sense of a wide interval is from 1550s. The Gulf Stream (1775) takes its
name from the Gulf of Mexico.


spade (n.1)

tool for digging, Old English spadu spade, from Proto-Germanic *spadan (cognates: Old Frisian spada
a spade, Middle Dutch spade a sword, Old Saxon spado, Middle Low German spade, German Spaten), from
PIE *spe-dh-, from root *spe- (2) long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe wooden blade,
paddle, Old English spon chip of wood, splinter, Old Norse spann shingle, chip; see spoon (n.)).
A spade differs from a two-handed shovel chiefly in the form and thickness of the blade [Century
Dictionary]. To call a spade a spade use blunt language, call things by right names (1540s)
translates a Greek proverb (known to Lucian), ten skaphen skaphen legein to call a bowl a bowl, but
Erasmus mistook Greek skaphe trough, bowl for a derivative of the stem of skaptein to dig, and the
mistake has stuck [see OED].


