truce (n.)

mutually agreed-upon temporary intermission of hostilities, early 13c., triws, variant of trewes,
originally plural of trewe faith, assurance of faith, covenant, treaty, from Old English treow
faith, truth, fidelity; pledge, promise, agreement, treaty, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (cognates:
Old Frisian triuwe, Middle Dutch trouwe, Dutch trouw, Old High German triuwa, German treue, Gothic
triggwa faith, faithfulness). Related to Old English treowe faithful (see true (adj.)). The Germanic
word was borrowed into Late Latin as tregua, hence French tr&egrave;ve, Italian tregua.


trucial (adj.)

1876, from truce + -ial. Trucial States, the pre-1971 name of the United Arab Emirates, is attested
from 1891, in reference to the 1835 maritime truce between Britain and the Arab sheiks of Oman.


assurance (n.)

late 14c., formal or solemn pledge, promise, also certainty, from Old French asseurance (11c.,
Modern French assurance) assurance, promise; truce; certainty, safety, security, from asseurer (see
assure). The word had a negative tinge 18c., often suggesting impudence or presumption.


fraternize (v.)

1610s, to sympathize as brothers, from French fraterniser, from Medieval Latin fraternizare, from
fraternus brotherly (see fraternity). Military sense of cultivate friendship with enemy troops is
from 1897 (used in World War I with reference to the Christmas Truce). Used oddly by World War II
armed forces to mean have sex with women from enemy countries.   A piece of frat, Wren-language for
any attractive young woman -- ex-enemy -- in occupied territory. [John Irving, Royal Navalese, 1946]
Related: Fraternized; fraternizing.


affray (n.)

c.1300, state of alarm produced by a sudden disturbance, from Old French effrei, esfrei disturbance,
fright, from esfreer (v.) to worry, concern, trouble, disturb, from Vulgar Latin *exfridare,
literally to take out of peace, from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Frankish *frithu peace, from
Proto-Germanic *frithuz peace, consideration, forbearance (cognates: Old Saxon frithu, Old English
fri&eth;u, Old High German fridu peace, truce), from PIE root *pri- to be friendly, love (see free
(adj.)). Meaning breach of the peace, riotous fight in public is from late 15c. Related verb afrey
(early 14c.) survives almost exclusively in its past participle, afraid (q.v.).


white (adj.)

Old English hwit bright, radiant; clear, fair, also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-
Germanic *hwitaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit, Old Norse hvitr, Dutch wit, Old High
German hwiz, German wei&szlig;, Gothic hveits), from PIE *kweid-o-, suffixed form of root *kweit-
white; to shine (cognates: Sanskrit svetah white; Old Church Slavonic sviteti to shine, svetu light;
Lithuanian &#353;viesti to shine, svaityti to brighten).    As a surname, originally with reference
to fair hair or complexion, it is one of the oldest in English, being well-established before the
Conquest. Meaning morally pure was in Old English. Association with royalist causes is late 18c.
Slang sense of honorable, fair is 1877, American English; in Middle English it meant gracious,
friendly, favorable. The racial sense of those races (chiefly European or of European extraction)
characterized by light complexion is recorded from c.1600; meaning characteristic of or pertaining
to white people is from 1852, American English. White supremacy attested from 1884, American
English; white flight is from 1966, American English.   White way brightly illuminated street in a
big city is from 1908. White flag of truce or surrender is from c.1600. White lie is attested from
1741. White Christmas is attested from 1847. White House as the name of the U.S. presidential
residence is recorded from 1811. White water river rapids is recorded from 1580s. White Russian
language of Byelorussia is recorded from 1850; the mixed drink is from c.1978. Astronomical white
dwarf is from 1924. White witch, one who used the power for good, is from 1620s.


