trunk (n.1)

mid-15c., box, case, from Old French tronc alms box in a church, also trunk of a tree, trunk of the
human body, wooden block (12c.), from Latin truncus trunk of a tree, trunk of the body, of uncertain
origin, perhaps originally mutilated, cut off. The meaning box, case is likely to be from the notion
of the body as the case of the organs. English acquired the main stem of a tree and torso of the
body senses from Old French in late 15c. The sense of luggage compartment of a motor vehicle is from
1930. Railroad trunk line is attested from 1843; telephone version is from 1889.


trunk (n.2)

elephant's snout, 1560s, apparently from trunk (n.1), perhaps from confusion with trump (n.2), short
for trumpet.


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


trunnion (n.)

either of two round projections of a cannon, 1620s, from French trognon core of fruit, stump, tree
trunk, from Middle French troignon (14c.), probably from Latin truncus (see trunk).


billiards (n.)

1590s, from French billiard, originally the word for the wooden cue stick, a diminutive from Old
French bille stick of wood, from Medieval Latin billia tree, trunk, possibly from Gaulish (compare
Irish bile tree trunk).


proboscis (n.)

c.1600, elephant's trunk, from Latin proboscis (Pliny), from Greek proboskis elephant's trunk,
literally means for taking food, from pro forward (see pro-) + boskein to nourish, feed, from
boskesthai graze, be fed, from stem *bot- (source of botane grass, fodder; see botanic).


truncheon (n.)

c.1300, shaft of a spear, also short stick, cudgel, from Old North French tronchon, Old French
tronchon (11c., Modern French tron&#231;on) a piece cut off, thick stick, stump, from Vulgar Latin
*truncionem (nominative *truncio), from Latin truncus trunk of a tree (see trunk). Meaning staff as
a symbol of office is recorded from 1570s; sense of policeman's club is recorded from 1880.


bronco (n.)

also broncho, 1850, American English, untamed or half-tamed horse, from noun use of Spanish bronco
(adj.) rough, rude, originally a noun meaning a knot in wood, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *bruncus a
knot, projection, apparently from a cross of Latin broccus projecting (see broach (n.)) + truncus
trunk of a tree (see trunk (n.)). Bronco-buster is attested from 1886.


trebuchet (n.)

medieval stone-throwing engine of war, c.1300 (in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French
trebuchet (12c.) stone-throwing siege engine, from trabuchier to overturn, fall to the ground,
overthrow (11c.), from tra- (from Latin trans-, here expressing displacement) + Old French buc
trunk, bulk, from Frankish *buk- trunk of the body, from Proto-Germanic *bheu-, variant of *beu-,
used in forming words loosely associated with swelling (such as German bauch belly; see bull (n.2)).


bole (n.)

early 14c., from Old Norse bolr tree trunk, from Proto-Germanic *bulas (cognates: Middle Dutch bolle
trunk of a tree), from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (cognates: Greek phyllon leaf, phallos
swollen penis; Latin flos flower, florere to blossom, flourish, folium leaf; Old Prussian balsinis
cushion; Old Norse belgr bag, bellows; Old English bolla pot, cup, bowl; Old Irish bolgaim I swell,
blath blossom, flower, bolach pimple, bolg bag; Breton bolc'h flax pod; Serbian buljiti to stare, be
bug-eyed; Serbo-Croatian blazina pillow).


stem (n.)

Old English stemn, stefn stem of a plant, trunk of a tree, also either end-post of a ship, from
Proto-Germanic *stamniz (cognates: Old Saxon stamm, Old Norse stafn stem of a ship; Danish stamme,
Swedish stam trunk of a tree; Old High German stam, German Stamm), from suffixed form of PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet).    Meaning support of a wineglass is from 1835. Meaning unchanging part
of a word is from 1830. Stems slang for legs is from 1860. The nautical sense is preserved in the
phrase stem to stern along the full length (of a ship), attested from 1620s. Stem cell attested by
1885.


Saratoga

in reference to a kind of large trunk, 1858, so called because it was much used by ladies traveling
to the summer resort of Saratoga, N.Y. The name, early recorded as saraghtogo, apparently is from an
Iroquoian language, but it is of unknown origin.


stirpes (n.)

plural of stirps, Latin, literally stem, stalk, trunk of a plant, figuratively scion, offspring,
descendant; source, origin, foundation, beginning. Hence stirpiculture breeding of special stocks or
strains.


steamer (n.)

1814 in the cookery sense, agent noun from steam (v.). From 1825 as a vessel propelled by steam,
hence steamer trunk (1885), one that carries the essentials for a voyage.


stocky (adj.)

c.1400, made of wood, from stock (n.1). Of plants, of stout and sturdy growth (not weedy) it is
recorded from 1620s. Of persons, thick-set, 1670s, suggestive of tree trunks, but compare also stock
in sense of trunk of the human body (late 14c.).


schnook (n.)

1948, probably from Yiddish shnuk elephant's trunk, or altered from schmuck (q.v.), or perhaps from
German schnucke a small sheep, used in U.S. Yiddish for a customer easily persuaded, a sucker.


stipe (n.)

stalk of a plant, 1785, from French stipe, from Latin stipes log, post, tree trunk (see stiff
(adj.)).


moniker (n.)

1849, said to be originally a hobo term (but attested in London underclass from 1851), of uncertain
origin; perhaps from monk (monks and nuns take new names with their vows, and early 19c. British
tramps referred to themselves as in the monkery). Its origins seem always to have been obscure:
Sir H. Rawlinson can decipher cuneiform, but can he tell us why moniker--the word has a certain
Coptic or Egyptian twang--means a name painted on a trunk? [The Saturday Review, Dec. 19, 1857]


buckboard (n.)

1839, plank on wheels, from board (n.1) + buck body of a cart or wagon (1690s), perhaps representing
a dialectal survival of Old English buc belly, body, trunk(see bucket). As a type of vehicle
constructed this way, from 1874.


truncate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin truncatus cut off, past participle of truncare to maim, mutilate, cut off,
from truncus mutilated, cut off, deprived of branches or limbs (see trunk). Related: Truncated;
truncating.


Stammbaum (n.)

German, family tree, especially of languages, 1939, from Stamm tree, trunk (see stem (n.)) + Baum
tree (see beam (n.)).


stolon (n.)

a shoot, sucker, c.1600, from Latin stolonem (nominative stolo) a shoot, branch, sucker, cognate
with Greek stele standing block, stelekhos trunk, stem, log; from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see
stall (n.1)).


chock (n.)

1670s, lumpy piece of wood, possibly from Old North French choque a block (Old French &ccedil;oche
log, 12c.; Modern French souche stump, stock, block), from Gaulish *tsukka a tree trunk, stump.


rump (n.)

hind-quarters, buttocks of an animal, mid-15c., from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish,
Norwegian rumpe, Swedish rumpa), from or corresponding to Middle Dutch romp, German Rumpf trunk,
torso. Sense of small remnant derives from tail and is first recorded 1640s in reference to the
English Rump Parliament (December 1648-April 1653). As an adjective from c.1600.


trounce (v.)

1550s, to trouble, afflict, harass, later to beat, thrash (1560s), of uncertain origin. Perhaps
related to Middle French troncer to cut, cut off a piece from, from tronce piece of timber, from Old
French tronc (see trunk). Related: Trounced; trouncing.


alveolus (n.)

1706, from Latin alveolus a tray, trough, basin; bed of a small river, diminutive of alvus belly,
stomach, paunch, bowels; hold of a ship, from PIE *aulo- hole, cavity (cognates: Greek aulos tube,
pipe, Old Church Slavonic uliji, Lithuanian aulys beehive (hollow trunk), Armenian yli pregnant).


stammtisch (n.)

1938, table reserved for regular customers in a German restaurant, from German Stammtisch, from
Stamm cadre, literally tree, trunk (see stem (n.)) + tisch table (see dish (n.)).


stipend (n.)

early 15c., periodical payment; soldier's pay, from Latin stipendium tax, impost, tribute, in
military use pay, salary, from stips alms, small payment, contribution of money, gift + pendere
weigh (see pendant). According to Klein's sources, the first element is related to Latin stipes log,
stock, trunk of a tree (see stipe). As a verb from late 15c.


code (n.)

c.1300, systematic compilation of laws, from Old French code system of laws, law-book (13c.), from
Latin codex, earlier caudex book, book of laws, literally tree trunk, hence, book made up of wooden
tablets covered with wax for writing. Meaning cipher (the sense in secret code) is from 1808.


torso (n.)

1797, from Italian torso trunk of a statue, originally stalk, stump, from Vulgar Latin *tursus, from
Latin thyrsus stalk, stem, from Greek thyrsos (see thyrsus).


carcass (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French carcois, from or influenced by Old French charcois (Modern French
carcasse) trunk of a body, chest, carcass, and Anglo-Latin carcosium dead body, all of uncertain
origin. Not used of humans after c.1750, except contemptuously. Italian carcassa probably is a
French loan word.


uppercut (n.)

in pugilism, a close-in strike upward with the fist, 1831, from upper + cut (n.). Perhaps the image
is of chopping a tree by making cuts up (as well as down) in the trunk.    It was on a side hill,
and I observed a boy, who appeared to be about fifteen years of age, opposite the house felling a
large tree; he had cut a few chips from the under side, and was then making the principal incision
on the upper. ... I said to the boy, Well Sir, I see that you make the upper cut. That is the true
cut, said the boy; for if you will take the axe and try below, you will find that the tree will
crowd down upon your chips, and you can't get it down in double the time. [Theodore Sedgwick, Hints
to My Countrymen, 1826]


bulwark (n.)

early 15c., from Middle Dutch bulwerke or Middle High German bolwerc, probably from bole plank, tree
trunk (from Proto-Germanic *bul-, from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, swell; see bole) + werc work
(see work (n.)). Figurative sense is from 1570s.


tree (n.)

Old English  treo, treow tree (also timber, wood, beam, log, stake), from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-
(cognates: Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu tree), from PIE *drew-o-,
from *deru- oak (cognates: Sanskrit dru tree, wood, daru wood, log; Greek drys oak, drymos copse,
thicket, doru beam, shaft of a spear; Old Church Slavonic drievo tree, wood; Serbian drvo tree, drva
wood; Russian drevo tree, wood; Czech drva; Polish drwa wood; Lithuanian derva pine, wood; Old Irish
daur, Welsh derwen oak, Albanian drusk oak). This is from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the root
*deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true), with specialized sense wood, tree and derivatives
referring to objects made of wood.    The line which divides trees from shrubs is largely arbitrary,
and dependent upon habit rather than size, the tree having a single trunk usually unbranched for
some distance above the ground, while a shrub has usually several stems from the same root and each
without a proper trunk. [Century Dictionary]    The widespread use of words originally meaning oak
in the sense tree probably reflects the importance of the oak to ancient Indo-Europeans. In Old
English and Middle English also thing made of wood, especially the cross of the Crucifixion and a
gallows (such as Tyburn tree, famous gallows outside London). Middle English also had plural treen,
adjective treen (Old English treowen of a tree, wooden). For Dutch boom, German Baum, the usual
words for tree, see beam (n.). Meaning framework of a saddle is from 1530s. Meaning representation
of familial relationships in the form of a tree is from c.1300. Tree-hugger, contemptuous for
environmentalist is attested by 1989.    Minc'd Pyes do not grow upon every tree,  But search the
Ovens for them, and there they be.  [Poor Robin, Almanack, 1669]


stump (n.)

part of a tree trunk left in the ground after felling, mid-15c. (implied from late 13c. in
surnames); from mid-14c. as remaining part of a severed arm or leg; from or cognate with Middle Low
German stump (from adjective meaning mutilated, blunt, dull), Middle Dutch stomp stump, from Proto-
Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stumpr, Old High German stumph, German stumpf stump, German
Stummel piece cut off), from PIE *stebh- post, stem; to support  (see step (v.).


boat (n.)

Old English bat boat, ship, vessel, from Proto-Germanic *bait- (cognates: Old Norse batr, Dutch
boot, German Boot), possibly from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure), with the sense of making
a boat by hollowing out a tree trunk; or it may be an extension of the name for some part of a ship.
French bateau boat is from Old English or Norse. Spanish batel, Italian battello, Medieval Latin
batellus likewise probably are from Germanic.


stocking (n.)

close-fitting garment covering the foot and lower leg, 1580s, from stock leg covering, stocking
(late 15c.), from Old English stocu sleeve, related to Old English stocc trunk, log (see stock
(n.1)). Probably so called because of a fancied resemblance of legs to tree trunks, or a reference
to the punishing stocks. Cognates include Old Norse stuka, Old High German stuhha, from the same
Proto-Germanic source. Restriction to women's hose is 20c. As a receptacle for Christmas presents,
attested from 1853; hence stocking stuffer first recorded 1945. Stocking-feet without shoes is from
1802.


stock (n.2)

supply for future use (early 15c.), sum of money (mid-15c.), Middle English developments of stock
(n.1), but the ultimate sense connection is uncertain. Perhaps the notion is of the trunk from which
gains are an outgrowth, or from stock (n.1) in obsolete sense of money-box (c.1400). Meaning
subscribed capital of a corporation is from 1610s.   In stock in the possession of a trader is from
1610s. Meaning broth made by boiling meat or vegetables is from 1764. Theatrical use, in reference
to a company regularly acting together at a given theater, is attested from 1761. Figurative phrase
take stock in regard as important is from 1870. As the collective term for the movable property of a
farm, it is recorded from 1510s; hence livestock.


girdle (n.)

Old English gyrdel belt, sash, cord about the waist, common Germanic. (cognates: Old Norse
gyr&eth;ill, Swedish g&ouml;rdel, Old Frisian gerdel, Dutch gordel, Old High German gurtil, German
G&uuml;rtel belt), related to Old English gyrdan to gird (see gird). Modern euphemistic sense of
elastic corset first recorded 1925. The verb meaning encircle with a girdle is attested from 1580s.
Meaning to cut off a belt of bark around a trunk to kill a tree is from 1660s. Related: Girdled;
girdling.


balk (n.)

Old English balca ridge, bank, from or influenced by Old Norse balkr ridge of land, especially
between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (cognates: Old Saxon balko, Danish
bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High German balcho, German Balken beam, rafter), from PIE *bhelg-
beam, plank (cognates: Latin fulcire to prop up, support, fulcrum bedpost; Lithuanian balziena
cross-bar; and possibly Greek phalanx trunk, log, line of battle). Modern senses are figurative,
representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)). Baseball sense is first
attested 1845.


block (n.)

solid piece, c.1300, from Old French bloc log, block of wood (13c.), via Middle Dutch bloc trunk of
a tree or Old High German bloh, from a common Germanic source, from PIE *bhlugo-, from *bhelg- a
thick plank, beam (see balk).    Meaning mould for a hat is from 1570s. Slang sense of head is from
1630s. Extended sense of obstruction is first recorded 1640s. In cricket from 1825; in U.S. football
from 1912. The meaning in city block is 1796, from the notion of a compact mass of buildings; slang
meaning fashionable promenade is 1869.    BLOCK. A term applied in America to a square mass of
houses included between four streets. It is a very useful one. [Bartlett]


bracket (n.)

1570s, bragget, architectural support, probably from Middle French braguette codpiece armor (16c.),
from a fancied resemblance of architectural supports to that article of attire (Spanish cognate
bragueta meant both codpiece and bracket), diminutive of brague knee pants, ultimately from Gaulish
*braca pants, itself perhaps from Germanic (compare Old English broc garment for the legs and trunk;
see breeches). The sense might reflect the breeches sense, on the notion of two limbs or of
appliances used in pairs. The typographical bracket is first recorded 1750, so called for its
resemblance to double supports in carpentry (a sense attested from 1610s). Senses affected by Latin
brachium arm.


snout (n.)

early 13c., trunk or projecting nose of an animal, from Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snute
snout, from Proto-Germanic *snut- (cognates: German Schnauze, Norwegian snut, Danish snude snout),
which Watkins traces to a hypothetical Germanic root *snu- forming words having to do with the nose,
imitative of a sudden drawing of breath (compare Old English gesnot nasal mucus; German schnauben
pant, puff, snort (Austrian dialect), schnaufen breathe heavily, pant, Schnupfen cold in the head;
Old Norse snaldr snout (of a serpent), snuthra to sniff, snuffle). Of other animals and
(contemptuously) of humans from c.1300.


phalanx (n.)

1550s, line of battle in close ranks, from Latin phalanx compact body of heavily armed men in battle
array, or directly from Greek phalanx (genitive phalangos) line of battle, battle array, also finger
or toe bone, originally round piece of wood, trunk, log, of unknown origin. Perhaps from PIE root
*bhelg- plank, beam (source of Old English balca balk; see balk (n.)). The Macedonian phalanx
consisted of 50 close files of 16 men each. In anatomy, originally the whole row of finger joints,
which fit together like infantry in close order. Figurative sense of number of persons banded
together in a common cause is attested from 1600 (compare Spanish Falangist, member of a fascist
organization founded in 1933).


staple (n.1)

bent piece of metal with pointed ends, late 13c., from Old English stapol post, pillar, trunk of a
tree, steps to a house, from Proto-Germanic *stapulaz pillar (cognates: Old Saxon stapal candle,
small tub, Old Frisian stapul stem of a tooth, Dutch stapel a prop, foot-rest, seat, Middle Low
German stapel block for executions, German Stapel stake, beam), from *stap-, from PIE stebh- (see
staff (n.)).    A general Germanic word that apparently evolved a specialized meaning in English,
though OED finds the connection unclear and suggests the later sense in English might not be the
same word. Meaning piece of thin wire driven through papers to hold them together is attested from
1895.


stiff (adj.)

Old English stif rigid, inflexible, from Proto-Germanic *stifaz inflexible (cognates: Dutch stijf,
Old High German stif, German steif stiff; Old Norse stifla choke), from PIE *stipos-, from root
*steip- press together, pack, cram (cognates: Sanskrit styayate coagulates, stima slow; Greek stia,
stion small stone, steibo press together; Latin stipare pack down, press, stipes post, tree trunk;
Lithuanian stipti stiffen, stiprus strong; Old Church Slavonic stena wall). Of battles and
competitions, from mid-13c.; of liquor, from 1813. To keep a stiff upper lip is attested from 1815.
Related: Stiffly.


body (n.)

Old English bodig trunk, chest (of a man or animal); related to Old High German botah, of unknown
origin. Not elsewhere in Germanic, and the word has died out in German (replaced by leib, originally
life, and k&ouml;rper, from Latin). In English, extension to person is from late 13c. Meaning main
part of anything was in late Old English, hence its use in reference to vehicles (1520s).
Contrasted with soul since at least mid-13c. Meaning corpse (short for dead body) is from late 13c.
Transferred to matter generally in Middle English (as in heavenly body, late 14c.). Body politic the
nation, the state first recorded 1520s, legalese, with French word order. Body image was coined
1935. Body language is attested from 1967, perhaps from French langage corporel (1966). Phrase over
my dead body attested by 1833.


breeches (n.)

c.1200, a double plural, from Old English brec breeches, which already was plural of broc garment
for the legs and trunk, from Proto-Germanic *brokiz (cognates: Old Norse brok, Dutch broek, Danish
brog, Old High German bruoh, German Bruch, obsolete since 18c. except in Swiss dialect), perhaps
from PIE root *bhreg- (see break (v.)). The Proto-Germanic word is a parallel form to Celtic
*bracca, source (via Gaulish) of Latin braca (aource of French braies), and some propose that the
Germanic word group is borrowed from Gallo-Latin, others that the Celtic was from Germanic.
Expanded sense of part of the body covered by breeches, posterior led to senses in childbirthing
(1670s) and gunnery (the part of a firearm behind the bore, 1570s). As the popular word for trousers
in English, displaced in U.S. c.1840 by pants. The Breeches Bible (Geneva Bible of 1560) so called
on account of rendition of Gen. iii:7 (already in Wyclif) They sewed figge leaues together, and made
themselues breeches.


