tuft (n.)

bunch of soft and flexible things fixed at the base with the upper ends loose, late 14c., of
uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French touffe tuft of hair (14c.), which is either from Late
Latin tufa a kind of crest on a helmet (also found in Late Greek toupha), or from a Germanic source
(compare Old High German zopf, Old Norse toppr tuft, summit; see top (n.1)). As a verb from 1530s.
Related: Tufted.


pompom (n.)

ornamental round tuft (originally on a hat, etc.), 1748, alteration of pompon ornamental tuft; tuft-
like flower head, from French pompon (1725), of unknown origin; perhaps related to Old French pompe
pomp.


tussock (n.)

1540s, tuft of hair, of uncertain origin; perhaps a diminutive of earlier tusk (1520s) with the same
meaning (and also of obscure origin). Meaning tuft of grass is first recorded c.1600.


top (n.1)

highest point, Old English top summit, crest, tuft, from Proto-Germanic *tuppaz (cognates: Old Norse
toppr tuft of hair, Old Frisian top tuft, Old Dutch topp, Dutch top, Old High German zopf end, tip,
tuft of hair, German Zopf tuft of hair); no certain connections outside Germanic except a few
Romanic words probably borrowed from Germanic.    Few Indo-European languages have a word so
generic, which can be used of the upper part or surface of just about anything. More typical is
German, which has Spitze for sharp peaks (mountains), oberfl&auml;che for the upper surface of flat
things (such as a table). Meaning highest position is from 1620s; meaning best part is from 1660s.
To go over the top is World War I slang for start an attack, in reference to the top of the
trenches; as beyond reasonable limits, too far it is recorded from 1968. Top of the world as
position of greatest eminence is from 1670s. Top-of-the-line (adj.) is by 1950.


floss (n.)

rough silk, 1759, perhaps from French floche tuft of wool (16c.), from Old French floc tuft, lock,
from Latin floccus tuft of wool. Or from an unrecorded Old English or Old Norse word from the root
found in Dutch flos plush (17c.). Compare the surname Flossmonger, attested 1314, which might
represent a direct borrowing from Scandinavian or Low German. In The Mill on the Floss the word is
the proper name of a fictitious river in the English Midlands.


panocha (n.)

also panoche, 1847, from American Spanish panocha brown sugar, perhaps ultimately from Latin
panucula tuft, diminutive of panus tuft, swelling; ear of millet (see panic (n.2)).


panache (n.)

1550s, a tuft or plume of feathers, from Middle French pennache tuft of feathers, from Italian
pennaccio, from Late Latin pinnaculum small wing, gable, peak (see pinnacle). Figurative sense of
display, swagger first recorded 1898 (in translation of Cyrano de Bergerac), from French.


crest (n.)

early 14c., from Old French creste tuft, comb (Modern French cr&ecirc;te), from Latin crista tuft,
plume, perhaps related to word for hair (such as crinis), but it also was used for crest of a cock
or a helmet. Replaced Old English hris.


toupee (n.)

1727, from French toupet tuft of hair, forelock, diminutive formed from Old French top tuft,
forelock, topknot (12c.), from Frankish *top or another Germanic source related to top (n.1) highest
point. Originally an artificial curl or lock on the top of the head; a style, not necessarily a
compensation for baldness. In 18c., also sometimes used of a person who wears a toupee. Slang short
form toup is recorded from 1959.


tuffet (n.)

1550s, little tuft, from Old French touffel (with diminutive suffix -et for French -el), diminutive
of touffe (see tuft). Obsolete except in the nursery rhyme Little Miss Muffet (1843), where it has
been felt to mean hassock, footstool.    LITTLE Miss Muffet  Sat on a tuffet  And made of her knees
such display  That the old fashioned spider,  Embarrassed beside her,  Was actually frightened away!
[Life Oct. 1, 1927]


sheaf (n.)

Old English sceaf (plural sceafas) large bundle of corn, from Proto-Germanic *skauf- (cognates: Old
Saxon scof, Middle Dutch scoof, Dutch schoof, Old High German scoub sheaf, bundle, German Schaub
sheaf; Old Norse skauf fox's tail; Gothic skuft hair on the head, German Schopf tuft), from PIE root
*(s)keup- cluster, tuft, hair of the head. Extended to bundles of things other than grain by c.1300.
Also used in Middle English for two dozen arrows. General sense of a collection is from 1728.


pom-pom (n.)

Maxim automatic gun, 1899, of imitative origin, soldiers' slang from the Boer War. For the
ornamental tuft, see pompom.


dollop (n.)

1570s, from East Anglian dialectal dallop patch, tuft or clump of grass, of uncertain origin. Modern
sense of a lump or glob is 1812. As a verb, from 1825.


tragus (n.)

eminence at the opening of the ear, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek tragos in this sense (Rufus of
Ephesus), properly he-goat; so called for the tuft of hair which grows there, which resembles a
goat's beard.


hassock (n.)

Old English hassuc clump of grass, coarse grass, of unknown origin. Sense of thick cushion is first
recorded 1510s, with the likely connection being the perceived similarity of a kneeling cushion and
a tuft of grass.


topknot (n.)

1680s, a bow; 1700, tuft of hair on the head, from top (adj.) + knot (n.).


scopa (n.)

tuft of hairs on a bee's leg, from Latin scopae (plural) twigs, shoots; a broom, brush, related to
scapus shaft (see scape (n.2)).


toff (n.)

lower-class London slang for stylish dresser, man of the smart set, 1851, said by OED to be probably
an alteration of tuft, formerly an Oxford University term for a nobleman or gentleman-commoner
(1755), in reference to the gold ornamental tassel worn on the caps of undergraduates at Oxford and
Cambridge whose fathers were peers with votes in the House of Lords.


skua (n.)

type of predatory gull, 1670s, from Faeroese skugvur, related to Old Norse skufr seagull, tuft,
tassel, and possibly to skauf fox's tail.


coma (n.2)

head of a comet, 1765, from Latin coma, from Greek kome hair of the head, of unknown origin. Earlier
in English as a botanical term for a tuft of hairs (1660s).


flock (n.2)

tuft of wool, mid-13c., probably from Old French floc, from Latin floccus flock of wool, lock of
hair.


villus (n.)

long, slender hair, 1704, plural villi, from modern use of Latin villus tuft of hair, shaggy hair,
wool, fleece (see velvet).


cirrus (n.)

1708, curl-like fringe or tuft, from Latin cirrus a lock of hair, tendril, curl, ringlet of hair;
the fringe of a garment. In meteorology, cirrus clouds attested from 1803. So called from fancied
resemblance of shape.


nap (n.1)

downy surface of cloth, mid-15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German noppe nap, tuft of wool,
probably introduced by Flemish cloth-workers. Cognate with Old English hnoppian to pluck, ahneopan
pluck off, Old Swedish niupa to pinch, Gothic dis-hniupan to tear.


burl (n.)

small knot in wool or cloth, mid-15c., from Old French bourle tuft of wool, which perhaps is related
to the root of bur, or from Vulgar Latin *burrula small flock of wool, from Late Latin burra wool.


lug (n.)

1620s, handle of a pitcher, from lugge (Scottish) earflap of a cap, ear (late 15c.; according to
OED, the common word for ear in 19c. Scotland), probably from Scandinavian (compare Swedish lugg
forelock, Norwegian lugg tuft of hair). The connecting notion is something that can be gripped and
pulled. Applied 19c. to mechanical objects that can be grabbed or gripped. Meaning stupid fellow is
from 1924; that of lout, sponger is 1931, American English. Compare lug-nut (1869), nut closed at
one end as a cap.


dock (n.3)

name for various tall, coarse weeds, Old English docce, from Proto-Germanic *dokkon (cognates:
Middle Dutch docke-, German Docken-, Old Danish dokka), akin to Middle High German tocke bundle,
tuft, and ultimately to the noun source of dock (v.).


rug (n.)

1550s, coarse fabric, of Scandinavian origin; compare Norwegian dialectal rugga coarse coverlet,
from Old Norse rogg shaggy tuft, from Proto-Germanic *rawwa-, perhaps related to rag (n.) and rough
(adj.). Sense evolved to coverlet, wrap (1590s), then mat for the floor (1808). Meaning toupee is
theater slang from 1940. Cut a rug dance is slang first attested 1942. To sweep (something) under
the rug in the figurative sense is from 1954.


hat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;t hat, head covering, from Proto-Germanic *hattuz hood, cowl (cognates: Frisian
hat, Old Norse hattr), from PIE root *kadh- cover, protect (cognates: Lithuanian kudas tuft or crest
of a bird, Latin cassis helmet). Now, head covering with a more or less horizontal brim. To throw
one's hat in the ring was originally (1847) to take up a challenge in prize-fighting. To eat one's
hat is said to have been originally To eat Old Rowley's [Charles II's] hat.


velvet (n.)

early 14c., probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al veluet, from Vulgar Latin *villutittus, diminutive of
Vulgar Latin *villutus velvet, literally shaggy cloth, from Latin villus shaggy hair, nap of cloth,
tuft of hair, probably a dialectal variant of vellus fleece, from PIE *wel-no-, suffixed form of
root *wel- (4) to tear, pull (see svelte).


fluff (n.)

light, feathery stuff, 1790, apparently a variant of floow wooly substance, down, nap (1580s),
perhaps from Flemish vluwe, from French velu shaggy, hairy, from Latin vellus fleece, or Latin
villus tuft of hair (see velvet). OED suggests fluff as an imitative modification of floow,
imitating the action of puffing away some light substance. Slang bit of fluff young woman is from
1903. The marshmallow confection Fluff dates to c.1920 in Massachusetts, U.S.


shepherd (n.)

Old English sceaphierde, from sceap sheep (see sheep) + hierde herder, from heord a herd (see herd
(n.)). Similar formation in Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schaphirde, Middle High German
schafhirte, German dialectal Schafhirt. Shepherds customarily were buried with a tuft of wool in
hand, to prove on Doomsday their occupation and be excused for often missing Sunday church.
Shepherd's pie is recorded from 1877.


rugged (adj.)

c.1300, rough, shaggy, careworn (originally of animals), from Old Norse rogg shaggy tuft (see rug).
The precise relationship to ragged is not quite clear, but the stem is no doubt ultimately the same
[OED]. Meaning vigorous, strong, robust is American English, by 1848.We were challenged with a
peace-time choice between the American system of rugged individualism and a European philosophy of
diametrically opposed doctrines -- doctrines of paternalism and state socialism. [Herbert Hoover,
speech in New York, Oct. 22, 1928]  Hoover said the phrase was not his own, and it is attested from
1897, though not in a patriotic context. Related: Ruggedly; ruggedness.


velour (n.)

1706, also velure, velours, from French velours velvet, from Old French velor, alteration of velos
velvet, from Old Proven&ccedil;al velos, from Latin villosus (adj.) shaggy, hairy, rough (in
Medieval Latin velvet), from villus shaggy hair, tuft of hair (see velvet).


rag (n.)

scrap of cloth, early 14c., probably from Old Norse r&#246;gg shaggy tuft, earlier raggw-, or
possibly from Old Danish rag (see rug), or a back-formation from ragged, It also may represent an
unrecorded Old English cognate of Old Norse r&#246;gg. In any case, from Proto-Germanic *rawwa-,
from PIE root *reue- (2) to smash, knock down, tear up, uproot (see rough (adj.)).    As an
insulting term for newspaper, magazine it dates from 1734; slang for tampon, sanitary napkin is
attested from 1930s (on the rag menstruating is from 1948). Rags personal clothing is from 1855
(singular), American English. Rags-to-riches rise from poverty to wealth is attested by 1896. Rag-
picker is from 1860; rag-shop from 1829.


turf (n.)

Old English turf, tyrf slab of soil and grass, sod, also surface of grassland, from Proto-Germanic
*turb- (cognates: Old Norse torf, Danish t&oslash;rv, Old Frisian turf, Old High German zurba,
German Torf), from PIE root *drebh- to wind, compress (cognates: Sanskrit darbhah tuft of grass).
Especially the race course, hence the turf the profession of racing horses (1755). French tourbe
turf is a Germanic loan-word. The Old English plural was identical with the singular, but in Middle
English turves sometimes was used. Slang meaning territory claimed by a gang is attested from 1953
in Brooklyn, N.Y.; earlier it had a jive talk sense of the street, the sidewalk (1930s), which is
attested in hobo use from 1899, and before that the work and venue of a prostitute (1860). Turf war
is recorded from 1962.


tail (n.1)

hindmost part of an animal, Old English t&aelig;gl, t&aelig;gel a tail, from Proto-Germanic *tagla-
(cognates: Old High German zagal, German Zagel tail, dialectal German Zagel penis, Old Norse tagl
horse's tail, Gothic tagl hair), from PIE *doklos, from suffixed form of root *dek- (2) something
long and thin (referring to such things as fringe, lock of hair, horsetail; cognates: Old Irish dual
lock of hair, Sanskrit dasah fringe, wick). According to OED, the primary sense, at least in
Germanic, seems to have been hairy tail, or just tuft of hair, but already in Old English the word
was applied to the hairless tails of worms, bees, etc. But Buck writes that the common notion is of
long, slender shape. As an adjective from 1670s.    Meaning reverse side of a coin (opposite the
side with the head) is from 1680s; that of backside of a person, buttocks is recorded from c.1300;
slang sense of pudenda is from mid-14c.; that of woman as sex object is from 1933, earlier act of
copulation with a prostitute (1846). Of descending strokes of letters, from 1590s.   Tails coat with
tails is from 1857. The tail-race (1776) is the part of a mill race below the wheel. To turn tail
take flight (1580s) originally was a term in falconry. The image of the tail wagging the dog is
attested from 1907. Another Old English word for tail was steort (see stark).


