tumult (n.)

late 14c., from Old French tumult (12c.), from Latin tumultus commotion, bustle, uproar, disorder,
disturbance, related to tumere to be excited, swell (see tumid).


tumultuous (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French tumultuous (Modern French tumultueux), from Latin tumultuosus full of
bustle or confusion, disorderly, turbulent, from tumultus (see tumult). Related: Tumultuously;
tumultuousness.


stir (n.)

commotion, disturbance, tumult, late 14c. (in phrase on steir), probably from a Scandinavian source,
such as Old Norse styrr disturbance, tumult, from the same root as stir (v.)). The sense of
movement, bustle (1560s) probably is from the English verb.


hurly-burly

also hurlyburly, 1530s, apparently an alteration of phrase hurling and burling, reduplication of
14c. hurling commotion, tumult, verbal noun of hurl (q.v.). Hurling time was the name applied by
chroniclers to the period of tumult and commotion around Wat Tyler's rebellion.


stour (n.)

c.1300, tumult, armed conflict, struggle with adversity or pain, from Anglo-French estur, Old French
estour a tumult, conflict, assault, shock, battle, from Proto-Germanic *sturmoz storm (cognates: Old
High German sturm storm; battle; see storm (n.)). Became obsolete, revived by Spenser and his
followers in various senses; also surviving as a Scottish and Northern English word meaning a
(driving) storm or uproar, commotion. Italian stormo also is from Germanic.


storm (n.)

Old English storm violent disturbance of the atmosphere, tempest; onrush, attack, tumult;
disturbance, from Proto-Germanic *sturmaz storm (cognates: Old Norse stormr, Old Saxon, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch, Dutch storm, Old High German sturm, German Sturm), from PIE *stur-mo-, from
root *(s)twer- (1) to turn, whirl. Old French estour onset, tumult, Italian stormo a fight are
Germanic loan-words. Figurative (non-meteorological) sense was in late Old English.   Storm-wind is
from 1798. Storm-door first recorded 1872; storm-water is from 1847; storm-window is attested from
1824. Storm surge attested from 1872. Adverbial phrase _______ up a storm is from 1946.


flap (n.)

mid-14c., flappe a blow, slap, probably imitative of the sound of striking. Meaning something that
hangs down is first recorded 1520s. Sense of motion or noise like a bird's wing is 1774; meaning
disturbance, noisy tumult is 1916, British slang.


clonus (n.)

violent muscular spasms, 1817, from Modern Latin, from Greek klonos turmoil, any violent motion;
confusion, tumult, press of battle, from PIE *kel- to drive, set in motion. Related: Clonic;
clonicity.


Boanerges

name given by Christ to John and James, the two sons of Zebedee (Mark iii:17), from Galilean
dialectal corruption of Hebrew bene reghesh sons of rage (interpreted in Greek as sons of thunder),
from bene (see B'nai B'rith) + reghesh commotion, tumult, throng. Applied figuratively to zealous or
loud preachers.


turbid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin turbidus muddy, full of confusion, from turbare to confuse, bewilder, from turba
turmoil, crowd, probably from Greek tyrbe turmoil, tumult, disorder, from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn,
whirl (see storm (n.)). Related: Turbidly; turbidness.


throng (n.)

c.1300, probably shortened from Old English ge&thorn;rang crowd, tumult (related to verb
&thorn;ringan to push, crowd, press), from Proto-Germanic *thrangan (cognates: Old Norse
&thorn;r&ouml;ng, Dutch drang, German Drang crowd, throng).


wuthering (adj.)

making a sullen roar (as the wind does), Northern England dialectal variant of Scottish and
dialectal whithering rushing, whizzing, blustering, from a verb whither (late 14c.) which was used
in reference to gusts of wind and coughing fits, from Old Norse *hvi&eth;ra (related to Norwegian
kvidra to go quickly to and fro, Old English hwi&thorn;a air, breeze).    Wuthering Heights is the
name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling. 'Wuthering' being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive
of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed, in stormy weather. [Emily Bront&#235;,
Wuthering Heights, 1847]    Charlotte also used forms of the word in her novels.


uproar (n.)

1520s, outbreak of disorder, revolt, commotion, used by Tindale and later Coverdale as a loan-
translation of German Aufruhr or Dutch oproer tumult, riot, literally a stirring up, in German and
Dutch bibles (as in Acts xxi:38). From German auf (Middle Dutch op) up (see up (adv.)) + ruhr
(Middle Dutch roer) a stirring, motion, related to Old English hreran to move, stir, shake (see rare
(adj.2)). Meaning noisy shouting is first recorded 1540s, probably by mistaken association with
unrelated roar.


swarm (n.)

cloud of bees or other insects, Old English swearm swarm, multitude, from Proto-Germanic *swarmaz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Middle Low German swarm, Danish sv&#230;rm a swarm, Swedish sv&auml;rm, Middle
Dutch swerm, Old High German swaram, German Schwarm swarm; Old Norse svarmr tumult), by Watkins,
etc., derived from PIE imitative root *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (see susurration) on notion of
humming sound, and thus probably originally of bees. But OED suggests possible connection with base
of swerve and ground sense of agitated, confused, or deflected motion. General sense large, dense
throng is from early 15c.


