turbidity (n.)

1782, from Medieval Latin turbiditas, from Latin turbidus (see turbid). Turbidity current is from
1939.


turbid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin turbidus muddy, full of confusion, from turbare to confuse, bewilder, from turba
turmoil, crowd, probably from Greek tyrbe turmoil, tumult, disorder, from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn,
whirl (see storm (n.)). Related: Turbidly; turbidness.


trouble (v.)

c.1200, from Old French trubler, metathesis of turbler, torbler to trouble, disturb; make cloudy,
stir up, mix (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *turbulare, from Late Latin turbidare to trouble, make
turbid, from Latin turbidus (see turbid). Related: Troubled; troubling.


turbulent (adj.)

early 15c., disorderly, tumultuous, unruly (of persons), from Middle French turbulent (12c.), from
Latin turbulentus full of commotion, restless, disturbed, boisterous, stormy, figuratively troubled,
confused, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). In reference to weather, from 1570s. Related:
Turbulently.


turbine (n.)

1838, from French turbine (19c.), from Latin turbinem (nominative turbo) spinning top, eddy,
whirlwind, that which whirls, related to turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). Originally applied to a
wheel spinning on a vertical axis driven by falling water. Turbo in reference to gas turbine engines
is attested from 1904.


gloom

c.1300 as a verb, to look sullen or displeased, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Norwegian
dialectal glome to stare somberly). Not considered to be related to Old English glom twilight, but
perhaps to Middle Low German glum turbid, Dutch gluren to leer. The noun is 1590s in Scottish,
sullen look, from the verb. Sense of darkness, obscurity is first recorded 1629 in Milton's poetry;
that of melancholy is 1744 (gloomy in this sense is attested from 1580s).


perturb (v.)

late 14c., from Old French perturber disturb, confuse (14c.) and directly from Latin perturbare to
confuse, disorder, disturb, especially of states of the mind, from per- through (see per) + turbare
disturb, confuse, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). Related: Perturbed; perturbing.


disturb (v.)

c.1300, to stop or hinder, from Old French destorber (Old North French distourber) and directly from
Latin disturbare throw into disorder, from dis- completely (see dis-) + turbare to disorder,
disturb, from turba turmoil (see turbid).    Meaning to frighten is late 13c.; that of to stir up,
agitate is c.1300. Related: Disturbed; disturbing; disturbingly. Middle English also had distourbler
(n.) one who disturbs or incites (late 14c.).


blend (v.)

c.1300, blenden, to mix, mingle, stir up a liquid, in northern writers, from or akin to rare Old
English blandan to mix, blondan (Mercian) or Old Norse blanda to mix, or a combination of the two;
from Proto-Germanic *blandan to mix, which comes via a notion of to make cloudy from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.); also blind (adj.)).
Compare Old Saxon and Old High German blantan, Gothic blandan, Middle High German blenden to mix;
German Blendling bastard, mongrel, and outside Germanic, Lithuanian blandus troubled, turbid, thick;
Old Church Slavonic blesti to go astray. Figurative use from early 14c. Related: Blended; blending.


