tutelary (adj.)

1610s, from Late Latin tutelarius a guardian, from Latin tutela protection, watching (see tutor
(n.)).


lares (n.)

Roman tutelary gods, household deities, Latin, plural of lar.


daimon (n.)

transliteration of Greek daimon lesser god, guiding spirit, tutelary deity, 1852; see demon.
Employed to avoid the post-classical associations of that word.


hermeneutic (adj.)

interpretive, 1670s, from Greek hermeneutikos interpreting, from hermeneutes interpreter, from
hermeneuein to interpret, of unknown origin (formerly considered ultimately a derivative of Hermes,
as the tutelary divinity of speech, writing, and eloquence).


genie (n.)

1650s, tutelary spirit, from French g&eacute;nie, from Latin genius (see genius); used in French
translation of Arabian Nights to render Arabic jinni, singular of jinn, which it accidentally
resembled, and attested in English with this sense from 1748.


genius (n.)

late 14c., tutelary god (classical or pagan), from Latin genius guardian deity or spirit which
watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation, wit, talent; also prophetic skill,
originally generative power, from root of gignere beget, produce (see kin), from PIE root *gen-
produce. Sense of characteristic disposition is from 1580s. Meaning person of natural intelligence
or talent and that of natural ability are first recorded 1640s.


demon (n.)

c.1200, from Latin daemon spirit, from Greek daimon deity, divine power; lesser god; guiding spirit,
tutelary deity (sometimes including souls of the dead); one's genius, lot, or fortune; from PIE
*dai-mon- divider, provider (of fortunes or destinies), from root *da- to divide (see tide (n.)).
Used (with daimonion) in Christian Greek translations and Vulgate for god of the heathen and unclean
spirit. Jewish authors earlier had employed the Greek word in this sense, using it to render shedim
lords, idols in the Septuagint, and Matt. viii:31 has daimones, translated as deofol in Old English,
feend or deuil in Middle English. Another Old English word for this was hellcniht, literally hell-
knight.    The original mythological sense is sometimes written daemon for purposes of distinction.
The Demon of Socrates was a daimonion, a divine principle or inward oracle. His accusers, and later
the Church Fathers, however, represented this otherwise. The Demon Star (1895) is Algol.


genus (n.)

(plural genera), 1550s as a term of logic, kind or class of things (biological sense dates from
c.1600), from Latin genus (genitive generis) race, stock, kind; family, birth, descent, origin,
cognate with Greek genos race, kind, and gonos birth, offspring, stock, from PIE root *gene-
produce, give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to family and tribal groups (cognates:
Sanskrit janati begets, bears, janah race, janman- birth, origin, jatah born; Avestan zizanenti they
bear; Greek gignesthai to become, happen; Latin gignere to beget, gnasci to be born, genius
procreative divinity, inborn tutelary spirit, innate quality, ingenium inborn character, germen
shoot, bud, embryo, germ; Lithuanian gentis kinsmen; Gothic kuni race; Old English cennan beget,
create; Old High German kind child; Old Irish ro-genar I was born; Welsh geni to be born; Armenian
chanim I bear, I am born).


