typhoon (n.)

Tiphon violent storm, whirlwind, tornado, 1550s, from Greek typhon whirlwind, personified as a
giant, father of the winds, perhaps from typhein to smoke (see typhus), but according to Watkins
from PIE *dheub- deep, hollow, via notion of monster from the depths. The meaning cyclone, violent
hurricane of India or the China Seas is first recorded 1588 in Thomas Hickock's translation of an
account in Italian of a voyage to the East Indies by Caesar Frederick, a merchant of Venice:
concerning which Touffon ye are to vnderstand, that in the East Indies often times, there are not
stormes as in other countreys; but euery 10. or 12. yeeres there are such tempests and stormes, that
it is a thing incredible, but to those that haue seene it, neither do they know certainly what yeere
they wil come. [The voyage and trauell of M. Caesar Fredericke, Marchant of Venice, into the East
India, and beyond the Indies]    This sense of the word, in reference to titanic storms in the East
Indies, first appears in Europe in Portuguese in the mid-16th century. It aparently is from tufan, a
word in Arabic, Persian, and Hindi meaning big cyclonic storm. Yule [Hobson-Jobson, London, 1903]
writes that the probability is that Vasco [da Gama] and his followers got the tufao ... direct from
the Arab pilots.    The Arabic word sometimes is said to be from Greek typhon, but other sources
consider it purely Semitic, though the Greek word might have influenced the form of the word in
English. Al-tufan occurs several times in the Koran for a flood or storm and also for Noah's Flood.
Chinese (Cantonese) tai fung a great wind also might have influenced the form or sense of the word
in English, and that term and the Indian one may have had some mutual influence; toofan still means
big storm in India.


Typhon

giant in Greek mythology; see typhoon.


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


