ulcer (n.)

c.1400, from Old French ulcere, from Vulgar Latin ulcerem, from Latin ulcus (genitive ulceris)
ulcer, a sore, figuratively painful subject, from PIE *elk-es- wound (cognates: Greek elkos a wound,
sore, ulcer, Sanskrit Related: arsah hemorrhoids).


ulcerous (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin ulcerosus full of sores, from stem of ulcus (see ulcer).


ulceration (n.)

c.1400, from Latin ulcerationem (nominative ulceratio), noun of action from past participle stem of
ulcerare to make sore, from stem of ulcus (see ulcer).


fistula (n.)

long, narrow ulcer, late 14c., from Latin fistula pipe; ulcer, of uncertain origin.


fester (v.)

late 14c., from Old French festre small sore discharging pus, from Latin fistula pipe, ulcer (see
fistula). The noun is from c.1300. Related: Festered; festering.


chancre (n.)

also chanker, venereal ulcer, c.1600, from French chancre (15c.), literally cancer, from Latin
cancer (see cancer).


wound (n.)

Old English wund hurt, injury, ulcer, from Proto-Germanic *wundaz (cognates: Old Saxon wunda, Old
Norse und, Old Frisian wunde, Old High German wunta, German wunde wound), perhaps from PIE root
*wen- (2) to beat, wound.


noli me tangere

late 14c., type of facial ulcer, lupus, Latin, literally touch me not, from noli, imperative of
nolle to be unwilling + me (see me) + tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Used over the years of
various persons or things that must not be touched, especially picture of Jesus as he appeared to
Mary Magdalene (1670s, see John 20:17) and plant of the genus Impatiens (1560s, so called because
the ripe seed pods burst when touched).


rankle (v.)

c.1300, to fester, from Old French rancler, earlier raoncler, draoncler to suppurate, run, from
draoncle abscess, festering sore, from Medieval Latin dracunculus, literally little dragon,
diminutive of Latin draco serpent, dragon (see dragon). The notion is of an ulcer caused by a
snake's bite. Meaning cause to fester is from c.1400. Related: Rankled; rankling.


canker (n.)

late Old English cancer spreading ulcer, cancerous tumor, from Latin cancer malignant tumor,
literally crab (see cancer); influenced in Middle English by Old North French cancre canker, sore,
abscess (Old French chancre, Modern French chancre). The word was the common one for cancer until
c.1700. Also used since 15c. of caterpillars and insect larvae that eat plant buds and leaves. As a
verb from late 14c. Related: Cankered; cankerous. Canker blossom is recorded from 1580s.


pock (n.)

Old English pocc pustule, blister, ulcer, from Proto-Germanic *puh(h)- to swell up, blow up
(cognates: Middle Dutch pocke, Dutch pok, East Frisian pok, Low German poche, dialectal German
Pfoche), from PIE root *beu- to swell, to blow (see bull (n.2)). Middle French pocque is from
Germanic. The plural form, Middle English pokkes, is the source of pox, which since early 14c. has
been used in the sense disease characterized by pocks.


attercop (n.)

spider, Old English attorcoppe, literally poison-head, from ator poison, venom, from Proto-Germanic
*aitra- poisonous ulcer (cognates: Old Norse eitr, Old High German eitar poison; German eiter pus,
Old High German eiz abscess, boil; Old English atorcr&aelig;ft art of poisoning) + copp top, summit,
round head, probably also spider (compare cobweb and Dutch spinne-cop spider).    Amptes &amp;
attircoppes &amp; suche o&thorn;er &thorn;at ben euere bisy ben maide to schewe man ensaumple of
stodye &amp; labour. [Elucidarium of Honorius of Autun (Wycliffite version) c.1400]


