ulterior (adj.)

1640s, on the other side of, from Latin ulterior more distant, more remote, farther, on the farther
side, comparative of *ulter beyond (see ultra-). The sense not at present in view or consideration
(as in ulterior motives) is attested from 1735.


leg (n.)

late 13c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse leggr leg, bone of the arm or leg, from
Proto-Germanic *lagjaz, with no certain ulterior connections, perhaps from a PIE root meaning to
bend [Buck]. Compare German Bein leg, in Old High German bone, leg. Replaced Old English shank. Of
furniture supports from 1670s. The meaning a part or stage of a journey or race (1920) is from
earlier sailing sense of a run made on a single tack (1867), which was usually qualified as long
leg, short leg, etc. Slang phrase shake a leg dance is attested from 1881. To be on (one's) last
legs at the end of one's life is from 1590s.


roost (n.)

late Old English hrost wooden framework of a roof, perch for domestic fowl, from Proto-Germanic
*hro(d)-st- (cognates: Old Saxon hrost framework of a roof, attic, Middle Dutch, Flemish, Dutch
roest roost, Old Norse hrot, Gothic hrot roof, of unknown origin. Exact relationship and ulterior
connections unknown. Extended sense hen-house is from 1580s. To rule the roost is recorded from
1769.


far (adj.)

Old English feorr far, remote, distant, to a great distance, long ago, from Proto-Germanic *ferro
(cognates: Old Saxon ferr, Old Frisian fer, Old Norse fjarre, Dutch ver, Old High German ferro,
German fern, Gothic fairra), from PIE *per- through, across, beyond (cognates: Sanskrit parah
farther, remote, ulterior, Hittite para outside of, Greek pera across, beyond, Latin per through,
Old Irish ire farther). Far East China, Japan, and surrounding regions is from 1838.


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


