ultimate (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin ultimatus, past participle of ultimare to be final, come to an end, from
Latin ultimus (fem. ultima) last, final, farthest, most distant, extreme, superlative of *ulter
beyond (see ultra-). As a noun from 1680s. Ultimate Frisbee is attested by 1972.


arnica (n.)

plant genus of the borage family, 1753, Modern Latin, of unknown origin. Klein suggests Arabic
arnabiyah, a name of a type of plant, as the ultimate source.


telos (n.)

ultimate object or aim, 1904, from Greek telos the end, fulfillment, completion (see tele-).


planxty (n.)

in Irish music, harp tune of a sportive and animated character [OED], 1790, of unknown origin,
evidently not a native Irish word; some suggest ultimate derivation from Latin plangere to strike,
beat  (see plague (n.)). See also [Katrin Thier, Of Picts and Penguins -- Celtic Languages in the
New Edition of the OED, in The Celtic Languages in Contact, 2007.


tai chi (n.)

1736, the supreme ultimate in Taoism and Neo-Confucianism, from Chinese tai extreme + ji limit. As
the name of a form of martial arts training (said to have been developed by a priest in the Sung
dynasty, 960-1279) it is first attested 1962, in full, tai chi ch'uan, with Chinese quan fist.


long run (n.)

also long-run, ultimate outcome, 1620s, from long (adj.) + run (n.), on notion of when events have
run their course. As an adjective from 1804.


pixie (n.)

c.1630, of obscure origin, perhaps from or related to Swedish dialect pyske small fairy, but West
County origin suggests ultimate source in Cornwall and thus something Celtic. Earliest references
were in pixy-path bewilderment, literally path on which one is led astray by pixies, and pixie-led
lost.


peek (v.)

late 14c., piken look quickly and slyly, of unknown origin. The words peek, keek, and peep all were
used with more or less the same meaning 14c.-15c.; perhaps the ultimate source was Middle Dutch
kieken. Related: Peeked; peeking.


pound (n.2)

enclosed place for animals, late 14c., from a late Old English word attested in compounds (such as
pundfald penfold, pound), related to pyndan to dam up, enclose (water), and thus from the same root
as pond. Ultimate origin unknown; some sources indicate a possible root *bend meaning protruding
point found only in Celtic and Germanic.


penultima (n.)

1580s, from Latin penultima (syllaba), the next to the last syllable of a word or verse, from fem.
of Latin adjective penultimus next-to-last, from paene almost + ultimus final (see ultimate).


nerf

1955, in nerf bars, hot-rodder slang for custom bumpers; from slang verb in auto racing (1953)
meaning to nudge something with a bumper in passing and knock it off course; ultimate origin and
signification unknown.    As a trademark name for toys made of foam-like material for indoor play,
introduced 1970 (Nerf ball). By 1995 this had yielded a verbal sense of to make less effective (as a
Nerf basketball is softer and lighter than the real thing).


monad (n.)

unity, arithmetical unit, 1610s, from Late Latin monas (genitive monadis), from Greek monas unit,
from monos alone (see mono-). In Leibnitz's philosophy, an ultimate unit of being (1748). Related:
Monadic.


quark (n.)

1964, applied by U.S. physicist Murray Gell-Mann (b.1929), who said in correspondence with the
editors of the OED in 1978 that he took it from a word in James Joyce's Finnegans Wake (1939), but
also that the sound of the word was in his head before he encountered the printed form in Joyce.
German Quark curds, rubbish has been proposed as the ultimate inspiration [Barnhart; Gell-Mann's
parents were immigrants from Austria-Hungary]. George Zweig, Gell-Mann's co-proposer of the theory,
is said to have preferred the name ace for them.


onager (n.)

Asiatic wild ass, mid-14c., from Latin onager, from Greek onagros, from onos ass (related to Latin
asinus, but the ultimate source is unknown) + agrios wild, literally living in the fields, from
agros field (see acre).


antepenultimate (adj.)

the last but two, 1730, from antepenult (n.), 1610s, abbreviation of Latin antepaenultima (syllaba),
fem. of antepaenultimus, from ante before (see ante) + paenultima, from paen almost + ultima last
(see ultimate).


dot (n.)

Old English dott speck, head of a boil, perhaps related to Norwegian dot lump, small knot, Dutch dot
knot, small bunch, wisp, Old High German tutta nipple; ultimate origin unclear.    Known from a
single source c.1000; the word reappeared with modern meaning mark c.1530; not common until 18c.
Morse telegraph sense is from 1838. On the dot punctual is 1909, in reference to a clock dial face.
Dot-matrix first attested 1975.


pluralism (n.)

1818, as a term in church administration, from plural + -ism. Attested from 1882 as a term in
philosophy for a theory which recognizes more than one ultimate principle. In political science,
attested from 1919 (in Harold J. Laski) in sense theory which opposes monolithic state power.
General sense of toleration of diversity within a society or state is from 1933. Related: Pluralist
(1620s, in the church sense); pluralistic.


ultimo (adv.)

in the month preceding the present, 1610s, common in abbreviated form ult. in 18c.-19c.
correspondence and newspapers, from Latin ultimo (mense) of last (month), ablative singular masc. of
ultimus last (see ultimate). Earlier it was used in the sense of on the last day of the month
specified (1580s). Contrasted with proximo in the next (month), from Latin proximo (mense).


brumal (adj.)

belonging to winter, 1510s, from Latin brumalis, from bruma winter (see brume). The Latin word also
is the ultimate source of Brumaire, second month (Oct. 22-Nov. 20) in calendar of the French
Republic, literally the foggy month, coined 1793 by Fabre d'Eglantine from French brume fog (see
brume).


dear (adj.)

Old English deore precious, valuable, costly, loved, beloved, from Proto-Germanic *deurjaz
(cognates: Old Saxon diuri, Old Norse dyrr, Old Frisian diore, Middle Dutch dure, Dutch duur, Old
High German tiuri, German teuer), ultimate origin unknown. Used interjectorily since 1690s. As a
polite introductory word to letters, it is attested from mid-15c. As a noun, from late 14c., perhaps
short for dear one, etc.


ultimatum (n.)

final demand, 1731, from Modern Latin, from Medieval Latin ultimatum a final statement, noun use of
Latin adjective ultimatum last possible, final, neuter of ultimatus (see ultimate). The Latin plural
ultimata was used by the Romans as a noun, what is farthest or most remote; the last, the end. In
slang c.1820s, ultimatum was used for the buttocks.


checkmate (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French eschec mat (Modern French &eacute;chec et mat), which (with Spanish jaque
y mate, Italian scacco-matto) is from Arabic shah mat the king died (see check (n.1)), which
according to Barnhart is a misinterpretation of Persian mat be astonished as mata to die, mat he is
dead. Hence Persian shah mat, if it is the ultimate source of the word, would be literally the king
is left helpless, the king is stumped.


trice (v.)

late 14c., haul up and fasten with a rope, from Middle Dutch trisen hoist, from trise pulley, of
unknown origin. Hence at a tryse (mid-15c.) in a very short time, literally at a single pluck or
pull. The Middle Dutch word is the source of Dutch trijsen to hoist and is cognate with Middle Low
German trissen (source of Danish trisse, German triezen); its ultimate origin is unknown.


wormwood (n.)

c.1400, folk etymology of Old English wermod wormwood, absinthe, related to vermouth, but the
ultimate etymology is unknown. Compare Old Saxon wermoda, Dutch wermoet, Old High German werimuota,
German Wermut. Weekley suggests wer man + mod courage, from its early use as an aphrodisiac.
Figurative use, however, is usually in reference to its proverbial bitter aftertaste. Perhaps
because of the folk etymology, it formerly was used to protect clothes and bedding from moths and
fleas. A medecyne for an hawke that hath mites. Take the Iuce of wormewode and put it ther thay be
and thei shall dye. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


rice (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French ris, from Italian riso, from Latin oriza, from Greek oryza rice, via an
Indo-Iranian language (compare Pashto vri&#382;e, Old Persian brizi), ultimately from Sanskrit
vrihi-s rice. The Greek word is the ultimate source of all European words (Welsh reis, German reis,
Lithuanian rysai, Serbo-Croatian riza, Polish ry&#380;, etc.). Introduced 1647 in the Carolinas.
Rice paper (1822), originally used in China, Japan, etc., is made from straw of rice.


stock (n.2)

supply for future use (early 15c.), sum of money (mid-15c.), Middle English developments of stock
(n.1), but the ultimate sense connection is uncertain. Perhaps the notion is of the trunk from which
gains are an outgrowth, or from stock (n.1) in obsolete sense of money-box (c.1400). Meaning
subscribed capital of a corporation is from 1610s.   In stock in the possession of a trader is from
1610s. Meaning broth made by boiling meat or vegetables is from 1764. Theatrical use, in reference
to a company regularly acting together at a given theater, is attested from 1761. Figurative phrase
take stock in regard as important is from 1870. As the collective term for the movable property of a
farm, it is recorded from 1510s; hence livestock.


plug (n.)

1620s, originally a seamen's term, probably from Dutch plug, Middle Dutch plugge bung, stopper,
related to Norwegian plugg, Danish pl&oslash;g, North Frisian plaak, Middle Low German pluck, German
Pflock; ultimate origin uncertain. Irish and Gaelic words are from English. Sense of wad or stick of
tobacco is attested from 1728, based on resemblance. Electrical sense is from 1883, based on being
inserted; meaning sparking device in an internal combustion engine is from 1886. Meaning
advertisement first recorded 1902, American English, perhaps from verb sense work energetically at
(c.1865).


traffic (n.)

c.1500, trade, commerce, from Middle French trafique (15c.), from Italian traffico (14c.), from
trafficare carry on trade, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Vulgar Latin *transfricare to rub
across, from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + fricare to rub (see friction), with the original
sense of the Italian verb being touch repeatedly, handle.    Or the second element may be an
unexplained alteration of Latin facere to make, do. Klein suggests ultimate derivation of the
Italian word from Arabic tafriq distribution. Meaning people and vehicles coming and going first
recorded 1825. Traffic jam is 1917, ousting earlier traffic block (1895). Traffic circle is from
1938.


veteran (n.)

c.1500, old experienced soldier, from French v&eacute;t&eacute;ran, from Latin veteranus old, aged,
that has been long in use, especially of soldiers; as a plural noun, old soldiers, from vetus
(genitive veteris) old, aged, advanced in years; of a former time, as a plural noun, vetores, men of
old, forefathers, from PIE *wet-es-, from root *wet- (2) year (cognates: Sanskrit vatsa- year, Greek
etos year, Hittite witish year, Old Church Slavonic vetuchu old, Old Lithuanian vetu&#353;as old,
aged; and compare wether). Latin vetus also is the ultimate source of Italian vecchio, French vieux,
Spanish viejo. General sense of one who has seen long service in any office or position is attested
from 1590s. The adjective first recorded 1610s.


loft (n.)

an upper chamber, c.1300, from late Old English loft the sky; the sphere of the air, from Old Norse
lopt air, sky, originally upper story, loft, attic (Scandinavian -pt- pronounced like -ft-), from
Proto-Germanic *luftuz air, sky (cognates: Old English lyft, Dutch lucht, Old High German luft,
German Luft, Gothic luftus air).    Sense development is from loft, ceiling to sky, air. Buck
suggests ultimate connection with Old High German louft bark, louba roof, attic, etc., with
development from bark to roof made of bark to ceiling, though this did not directly inform the
meaning air, sky. But Watkins says this is probably a separate Germanic root. Meaning gallery in a
church first attested c.1500.


cry (v.)

early 13c., beg, implore, from Old French crier, from Vulgar Latin *critare, from Latin quiritare to
wail, shriek (source of Italian gridare, Old Spanish cridar, Spanish and Portuguese gritar), of
uncertain origin; perhaps a variant of quirritare to squeal like a pig, from *quis, echoic of
squealing, despite ancient folk etymology that traces it to call for the help of the Quirites, the
Roman constabulary. The meaning was extended 13c. to weep, which it largely replaced by 16c.
Related: Cried; crying.    Most languages, in common with English, use the general word for cry out,
shout, wail to also mean weep, shed tears to express pain or grief. Romance and Slavic, however, use
words for this whose ultimate meaning is beat (the breast), compare French pleurer, Spanish llorar,
both from Latin plorare cry aloud, but probably originally plodere beat, clap the hands. Also
Italian piangere (cognate with French plaindre lament, pity) from Latin plangere, originally beat,
but especially of the breast, as a sign of grief. U.S. colloquial for crying out loud is 1924,
probably another euphemism for for Christ's sake.


pig (n.)

probably from Old English *picg, found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally young pig
(the word for adults was swine). Apparently related to Low German bigge, Dutch big (but the
phonology is difficult -- OED). The meaning oblong piece of metal is first attested 1580s, on the
notion of large mass. Applied to persons, usually in contempt, since 1540s; the derogatory slang
meaning police officer has been in underworld slang since at least 1811.    The pigs frisked my
panney, and nailed my screws; the officers searched my house, and seized my picklock keys.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]     Another Old
English word for pig was fearh, related to furh furrow, from PIE *perk- dig, furrow (source also of
Latin porc-us pig, see pork). This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical
attributes or activities [Lass]. Synonyms grunter, porker are from sailors' and fishermen's
euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of
the Gadarene swine, who drowned. The image of a pig in a poke is attested from 1520s (see poke
(n.3)). Flying pigs as a type of something unreal is from 1610s.


Australia

from Latin Terra Australis (16c.), from australis southern + -ia. A hypothetical southern continent,
known as terra australis incognita, had been proposed since 2c. Dutch explorers called the newfound
continent New Holland; the current name was suggested 1814 by Matthew Flinders as an improvement
over Terra Australis as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the name of the
other great portions of the earth [Voyage to Terra Australis]. In 1817 Gov. Lachlan Macquarie,
having read Flinders' suggestion, began using it in official correspondence. The ultimate source is
Latin auster south wind, hence, the south country.    The Latin sense shift in australis, if it is
indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for east (see aurora), for which Latin uses
oriens (see orient), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian
peninsula, with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy
[Buck]; see Walde, Alois, Lateinisches etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch, 3rd. ed., vol. 1, p.87;
Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, Dictionnaire &eacute;tymologique de la langue latine, 2nd. ed.,
p.94. Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- to shine, source of aurora,
which also produces words for burning, with reference to the hot south wind that blows into Italy.
Thus auster (hot) south wind, metaphorically extended to south.


understand (v.)

Old English understandan comprehend, grasp the idea of, probably literally stand in the midst of,
from under + standan to stand (see stand (v.)). If this is the meaning, the under is not the usual
word meaning beneath, but from Old English under, from PIE *nter- between, among (cognates: Sanskrit
antar among, between, Latin inter between, among, Greek entera intestines; see inter-). Related:
Understood; understanding   That is the suggestion in Barnhart, but other sources regard the among,
between, before, in the presence of sense of Old English prefix and preposition under as other
meanings of the same word. Among seems to be the sense in many Old English compounds that resemble
understand, such as underniman to receive, undersecan examine, investigate, scrutinize (literally
underseek), under&eth;encan consider, change one's mind, underginnan to begin. It also seems to be
the sense still in expressions such as under such circumstances.    Perhaps the ultimate sense is be
close to; compare Greek epistamai I know how, I know, literally I stand upon. Similar formations are
found in Old Frisian (understonda), Middle Danish (understande), while other Germanic languages use
compounds meaning stand before (German verstehen, represented in Old English by forstanden). For
this concept, most Indo-European languages use figurative extensions of compounds that literally
mean put together, or separate, or take, grasp (see comprehend). Old English oferstandan, Middle
English overstonden, literally over-stand seem to have been used only in literal senses. For to
stand under in a physical sense, Old English had undergestandan.


city (n.)

early 13c., in medieval usage a cathedral town, but originally any settlement, regardless of size
(distinction from town is 14c., though in English it always seems to have ranked above borough),
from Old French cite town, city (10c., Modern French cit&eacute;), from earlier citet, from Latin
civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally citizenship, condition or
rights of a citizen, membership in the community, later community of citizens, state, commonwealth
(used, for instance of the Gaulish tribes), from civis townsman, from PIE root *kei- to lie; bed,
couch; homestead; beloved, dear (see cemetery).    The sense has been transferred from the
inhabitants to the place. The Latin word for city was urbs, but a resident was civis. Civitas seems
to have replaced urbs as Rome (the ultimate urbs) lost its prestige. Loss of Latin -v- is regular in
French in some situations (compare alleger from alleviare; neige from nivea; jeune from juvenis. A
different sound evolution from the Latin word yielded Italian citta, Catalan ciutat, Spanish ciudad,
Portuguese cidade.    Replaced Old English burh (see borough). London is the city from 1550s. As an
adjective from c.1300. City hall first recorded 1670s to fight city hall is 1913, American English;
city slicker first recorded 1916 (see slick); both American English. City limits is from 1825. The
newspaper city desk attested from 1878. Inner city first attested 1968. City state (also city-state)
is attested from 1877.


rat (n.)

late Old English r&aelig;t rat, of uncertain origin. Similar words are found in Celtic (Gaelic
radan), Romanic (Italian ratto, Spanish rata, French rat) and Germanic (Old Saxon ratta; Dutch rat;
German Ratte, dialectal Ratz; Swedish r&#229;tta, Danish rotte) languages, but connection is
uncertain and origin unknown. In all this it is very much like cat.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin
*rattus, but Weekley thinks this is of Germanic origin, the animal having come from the East with
the race-migrations and the word passing thence to the Romanic languages. American Heritage and
Tucker connect Old English r&aelig;t to Latin rodere and thus PIE *red- to scrape, scratch, gnaw,
source of rodent (q.v.). Klein says there is no such connection and suggests a possible cognate in
Greek rhine file, rasp. Weekley connects them with a question mark and Barnhart writes, the
relationship to each other of the Germanic, Romance, and Celtic words for rat is uncertain. OED says
probable the rat word spread from Germanic to Romanic, but takes no position on ultimate origin.
RATS. Of these there are the following kinds: a black rat and a grey rat, a py-rat and a cu-rat.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1788]    Middle English common form was ratton, from
augmented Old French form raton. Sense of one who abandons his associates (1620s) is from belief
that rats leave a ship about to sink or a house about to fall and led to meaning traitor, informant
(1902; verb 1910). Interjection rats is American English, 1886. To smell a rat is 1540s; to be put
on the watch by suspicion as the cat by the scent of a rat; to suspect danger [Johnson]. _____-rat,
person who frequents _____ (in earliest reference dock-rat) is from 1864.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


