umbrage (n.)

early 15c., shadow, shade, from Middle French ombrage shade, shadow, from noun use of Latin
umbraticum of or pertaining to shade; being in retirement, neuter of umbraticus of or pertaining to
shade, from umbra shade, shadow, from PIE root *andho- blind, dark (cognates: Sanskrit andha-,
Avestan anda- blind, dark). Many figurative uses in 17c.; main remaining one is the meaning
suspicion that one has been slighted, first recorded 1610s; hence phrase to take umbrage at,
attested from 1670s.


umbrageous (adj.)

shady, 1580s, from French ombrageux, from Old French umbrageus, from umbre shade, from Latin umbra
(see umbrage).


umbel (n.)

1590s in botany, from Latin umbella parasol, sunshade, diminutive of umbra (see umbrage).


dudgeon (n.)

1570s, duggin, of unknown origin. One suggestion is Italian aduggiare to overshadow, giving it the
same sense development as umbrage. No clear connection to earlier dudgeon (late 14c.), a kind of
wood used for knife handles, which is perhaps from a French word.


umbra (n.)

1590s, phantom, ghost, a figurative use from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage). Astronomical
sense of shadow cast by the earth or moon during an eclipse is first recorded 1670s. Meaning an
uninvited guest accompanying an invited one is from 1690s in English, from a secondary sense among
the Romans. Related: Umbral.


penumbra (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin penumbra partial shadow outside the complete shadow of an eclipse, coined
1604 by Kepler from Latin p&aelig;ne almost + umbra shadow (see umbrage). Related: Penumbral.


adumbration (n.)

1530s, from Latin adumbrationem (nominative adumbratio) a sketch in shadow, sketch, outline, noun of
action from past participle stem of adumbrare to cast a shadow, overshadow, represent (a thing) in
outline, from ad- to (see ad-) + umbrare to cast in shadow, from PIE *andho- blind, dark (see
umbrage).


somber (adj.)

1760 gloomy, shadowy (earlier sombrous, c.1730), from French sombre dark, gloomy, from Old French
sombre (14c.), from an adjective from Late Latin subumbrare to shadow, from sub under (see sub-) +
umbra shade, shadow, perhaps from a suffixed form of PIE *andho- blind, dark (see umbrage). Related:
Somberly; somberness.


umber (n.)

brown earthy pigment, 1560s, from Middle French ombre (in terre d'ombre), or Italian ombra (in terra
di ombra), both from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage) or else from Umbra, fem. of Umber
belonging to Umbria, region in central Italy from which the coloring matter first came (compare
Sienna). Burnt umber, specially prepared and redder in color, is attested from c.1650, distinguished
from raw umber.


umbrella (n.)

hand-held portable canopy which opens and folds, c.1600, first attested in Donne's letters, from
Italian ombrello, from Late Latin umbrella, altered (by influence of umbra) from Latin umbella
sunshade, parasol, diminutive of umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage).    A sunshade in the
Mediterranean, a shelter from the rain in England; in late 17c. usage, usually as an Oriental or
African symbol of dignity. Said to have been used by women in England from c.1700; the use of rain-
umbrellas carried by men there traditionally is dated to c.1750, first by Jonas Hathaway, noted
traveler and philanthropist. Figurative sense of authority, unifying quality (usually in a phrase
such as under the umbrella of) is recorded from 1948.


