uncouth (adj.)

Old English uncu&eth; unknown, strange, unusual; uncertain, unfamiliar; unfriendly, unkind, rough,
from un- (1) not + cu&eth; known, well-known, past participle of cunnan to know (see can (v.1)).
Meaning strange, crude, clumsy is first recorded 1510s. The compound (and the thing it describes)
widespread in IE languages, such as Latin ignorantem, Old Norse uku&eth;r, Gothic unkun&thorn;s,
Sanskrit ajnatah, Armenian ancanaut', Greek agnotos, Old Irish ingnad unknown.


saying (n.)

utterance, recitation, action of the verb 'say,'  c.1300, verbal noun from say (v.); meaning
something that has been said (usually by someone thought important) is from c.1300; sense of a
proverb is first attested mid-15c.   <b>&#199;a va sans dire</b>, a familiar French locution, whose
English equivalent might be that is a matter of course, or that may be taken for granted. But
recently it has become the tendency to translate it literally, that goes without saying, and these
words, though originally uncouth and almost unmeaning to the unpractised ear, are gradually
acquiring the exact meaning of the French. [Walsh, 1892]


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


corrupt (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French corropt unhealthy, corrupt; uncouth (of language), and directly from Latin
corruptus, past participle of corrumpere to destroy; spoil, figuratively corrupt, seduce, bribe,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + rup-, past participle stem of rumpere to break (see
rupture (n.)). Related: Corruptly; corruptness.


couth (adj.)

Old English cu&eth;e known, past participle of cunnan (see can (v.1)), from Proto-Germanic *kunthaz
(cognates: Old Frisian kuth known, Old Saxon cuth, Old High German kund, German kund, Gothic
kun&thorn;s known).    Died out as such 16c. with the emergence of could, but the old word was
reborn 1896, with a new sense of cultured, refined, as a back-formation from uncouth (q.v.). The Old
English word forms the first element in the man's proper name Cuthbert, literally famous-bright.


can (v.1)

Old English 1st &amp; 3rd person singular present indicative of cunnan know, have power to, be able,
(also to have carnal knowledge), from Proto-Germanic *kunnan to be mentally able, to have learned
(cognates: Old Norse kenna to know, make known, Old Frisian kanna to recognize, admit, German kennen
to know, Gothic kannjan to make known), from PIE root *gno- (see know).    Absorbing the third sense
of to know, that of to know how to do something (in addition to to know as a fact and to be
acquainted with something or someone). An Old English preterite-present verb, its original past
participle, couth, survived only in its negation (see uncouth), but see also could. The present
participle has spun off as cunning.


ignorant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ignorant (14c.), from Latin ignorantia, from ignorantem (nominative
ignorans), present participle of ignorare not to know, to be unacquainted; mistake, misunderstand;
take no notice of, pay no attention to, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ Old Latin gnarus aware, acquainted with (cognates: Classical Latin noscere to know, notus known),
from Proto-Latin suffixed form *gno-ro-, related to gnoscere to know (see know).    Form influenced
by Latin ignotus unknown. Also see uncouth. Colloquial sense of ill-mannered first attested 1886. As
a noun meaning ignorant person from mid-15c.


redneck (n.)

cracker, attested 1830 in a specialized sense (This may be ascribed to the Red Necks, a name
bestowed upon the Presbyterians in Fayetteville -- Ann Royall, Southern Tour I, p.148), from red
(adj.1) + neck (n.). According to various theories, red perhaps from anger, or from pellagra, but
most likely from mule farmers' outdoors labor in the sun, wearing a shirt and straw hat, with the
neck exposed. Compare redshanks, old derogatory name for Scots Highlanders and Celtic Irish (1540s),
from their going bare-legged.    It turns up again in an American context in 1904, again from
Fayetteville, in a list of dialect words, meaning this time an uncouth countryman [Dialect Notes,
American Dialect Society, Vol. II, Part VI, 1904], but seems not to have been in widespread use in
the U.S. before c.1915. In the meantime, it was used from c.1894 in South Africa (translating Dutch
Roinek) as an insulting Boer name for an Englishman.    Another common Boer name for an Englishman
is redneck, drawn from the fact that the back of an Englishman's neck is often burnt red by the sun.
This does not happen to the Boer, who always wears a broad-brimmed hat. [James Bryce, Impressions of
South Africa, London, 1899]


bear (n.)

Old English bera bear, from Proto-Germanic *beron, literally the brown (one) (cognates: Old Norse
bj&ouml;rn, Middle Dutch bere, Dutch beer, Old High German bero, German B&auml;r), from PIE *bher-
(3) bright, brown (see brown (adj.)).    Greek arktos and Latin ursus retain the PIE root word for
bear (*rtko; see Arctic), but it is believed to have been ritually replaced in the northern branches
because of hunters' taboo on names of wild animals (compare the Irish equivalent the good calf,
Welsh honey-pig, Lithuanian the licker, Russian medved honey-eater). Others connect the Germanic
word with Latin ferus wild, as if it meant the wild animal (par excellence) of the northern woods.
Symbolic of Russia since 1794. Used of uncouth persons since 1570s. Stock market meaning speculator
for a fall is 1709 shortening of bearskin jobber (from the proverb sell the bearskin before one has
caught the bear); i.e. one who sells stock for future delivery, expecting that meanwhile prices will
fall. Paired with bull from c.1720. Bear claw as a type of large pastry is from 1942, originally
chiefly western U.S.


