unction (n.)

act of anointing as a religious rite, late 14c., from Latin unctionem (nominative unctio) anointing,
from unctus, past participle of ungere to anoint (see unguent).


unctuous (adj.)

late 14c., oily, having a greasy or soapy feeling when touched, from Old French unctueus, from
Medieval Latin unctuosus greasy, from Latin unctus act of anointing, from past participle stem of
unguere to anoint (see unguent).    Figurative sense of blandly ingratiating is first recorded 1742,
perhaps in part with a literal sense, but in part a sarcastic usage from unction in the meaning deep
spiritual feeling (1690s), such as comes from having been anointed in the rite of unction. Related:
Unctuously; unctuousness.


chrism (n.)

oil mingled with balm, Old English chrisma, from Church Latin chrisma, from Greek khrisma an
unguent, anointing, unction, from khriein to anoint, from PIE root *ghrei- to rub (cognates:
Lithuanian griej&#249; to skim the cream off). Chrisom baptismal robe, is a c.1200 variant of this.
Related: Chrismal; chrismatory.


extreme (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French extreme (13c.), from Latin extremus outermost, utmost, farthest, last,
superlative of exterus (see exterior).    In English as in Latin, not always felt as a superlative,
hence more extreme, most extreme (which were condemned by Johnson). The noun is first recorded
1540s, originally of the end of life, compare Latin in extremis. Extreme unction preserves the sense
of last, latest (15c.). Extremes opposite ends of anything is from 1550s.


sacrament (n.)

outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace, also the eucharist, c.1200, from Old French
sacrament consecration; mystery (12c., Modern French sacrement) and directly from Latin sacramentum
a consecrating (also source of Spanish sacramento, German Sakrament, etc.), from sacrare to
consecrate (see sacred); a Church Latin loan-translation of Greek mysterion (see mystery).
Meaning a holy mystery in English is from late 14c. The seven sacraments are baptism, penance,
confirmation, holy orders, the Eucharist, matrimony, and anointing of the sick (extreme unction).


