underlying (adj.)

1610s, present participle adjective from underlie.


undercurrent (n.)

1660s, stream of water or air flowing beneath the surface or beneath another current, a hybrid
formed from under + current (n.). The figurative sense of suppressed or underlying character is
attested from 1817.


subtext (n.)

underlying theme of a work of literature, 1950, from sub- + text (n.). Originally a term in
Konstantin Stanislavsky's theory of acting. Earlier it was used in a literally sense of text
appearing below other text on  a page (1726). Latin subtextere meant to weave under, work in below.


pet (n.2)

peevishness, offense at feeling slighted, 1580s, in phrase take the pet take offense. Perhaps from
pet (n.1) on a similar notion to that in American English that gets my goat, but the underlying
notion is obscure, and the form of the original expression makes this doubtful. This word seems to
have been originally a southern English term, while pet (n.1) was northern and Scottish.


underlie (v.)

Old English under licgan to be subordinate to, to submit to; see under + lie (v.2). Meaning to lie
under or beneath is attested from c.1600; figurative sense of to be the basis of is attested from
1852 (implied in underlying). Similar formation in Old High German untarliggan; German unterliegen.


suck (v.)

Old English sucan to suck, from a Germanic root of imitative origin (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High
German sugan, Old Norse suga, Danish suge, Swedish suga, Middle Dutch sughen, Dutch zuigen, German
saugen to suck), possibly from the same source as Latin sugere to suck, succus juice, sap; Old Irish
sugim, Welsh sugno to suck; see sup (v.2). As a noun from c.1300.    Meaning do fellatio is first
recorded 1928. Slang sense of be contemptible first attested 1971 (the underlying notion is of
fellatio). Related: Sucked; sucking. Suck eggs is from 1906. Suck hind tit be inferior is American
English slang first recorded 1940.    The old, old saying that the runt pig always sucks the hind
teat is not so far wrong, as it quite approximates the condition that exists. [The Chester White
Journal, April 1921]


