ungainly (adj.)

1610s, unfit, improper, from Middle English ungeinliche, from ungein (late 14c.) inconvenient,
disagreeable, troublesome, from un- (1) not + gein kind, helpful; reliable; beneficial; suitable,
appropriate; convenient, from Old Norse gegn straight, direct, helpful, from Proto-Germanic *gagina
against (see again). Old English had ung&aelig;nge useless, vain.


gawky (adj.)

awkward, ungainly, 1724, from gawk hand left hand (1703), perhaps a contraction of gaulick, thus
gaulish hand, derogatory slang that could have originated during some period of strained Anglo-
French relations, i.e. most of recorded history.


clownish (adj.)

1560s, rustic; 1580s, boorish, ungainly, awkward, from clown (n.) + -ish. Related: Clownishly;
clownishness.


ballyhoo (n.)

publicity, hype, 1908, from circus slang, a short sample of a sideshow (1901), of unknown origin.
There is a village of Ballyhooly in County Cork, Ireland. In nautical lingo, ballahou or ballahoo
(1867, perhaps 1836) meant an ungainly vessel, from Spanish balahu schooner.


shamble (v.)

to walk with a shuffling gait, walk awkwardly and unsteadily, 1680s, from an adjective meaning
ungainly, awkward (c.1600), from shamble (n.) table, bench (see shambles), perhaps on the notion of
the splayed legs of bench, or the way a worker sits astride it. Compare French bancal bow-legged,
wobbly (of furniture), properly bench-legged, from banc bench. The noun meaning a shambling gait is
from 1828. Related: Shambled; shambling.


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


