unguent (n.)

ointment, early 15c., from Latin unguentem ointment, from stem of unguere to anoint or smear with
ointment, from PIE root *ongw- to salve, anoint (cognates: Sanskrit anakti anoints, smears, Armenian
aucanem I anoint, Old Prussian anctan butter, Old High German ancho, German anke butter, Old Irish
imb, Welsh ymenyn butter).


ointment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French oignement ointment, salve, unguent, from Vulgar Latin *unguimentum, from
Latin unguentum (see unguent). The first -t- emerged in Old French from oint, past participle of
verb oindre to anoint.


spikenard (n.)

mid-14c., aromatic substance from an Indian plant, famous perfumed unguent of the ancients, from
Medieval Latin spica nardi (see spike (n.2)), rendering Greek nardou stakhys, in which the other
element probably ultimately from Sanskrit nalada-, the name of the plant.


unction (n.)

act of anointing as a religious rite, late 14c., from Latin unctionem (nominative unctio) anointing,
from unctus, past participle of ungere to anoint (see unguent).


chrism (n.)

oil mingled with balm, Old English chrisma, from Church Latin chrisma, from Greek khrisma an
unguent, anointing, unction, from khriein to anoint, from PIE root *ghrei- to rub (cognates:
Lithuanian griej&#249; to skim the cream off). Chrisom baptismal robe, is a c.1200 variant of this.
Related: Chrismal; chrismatory.


adipose (adj.)

1743, from Modern Latin adiposus fatty, from Latin adipem (nominative adeps, genitive adipis) soft
fat of animals, fat, lard, from Greek aleipha unguent, fat, related to lipos grease, fat (see leave
(v.)). Change of -l- to -d- prob. due to Umbrian influence [Klein]. But it could as well be a native
Italic formation from the same roots,  *ad-leip-a sticking onto.


smegma (n.)

sebaceous secretion, 1819, from Latin, from Greek smegma a detergent, soap, unguent, from smekhein
to wipe off, wipe clean, cleanse, from PIE root *sme- to smear (cognates: Czech smetana cream, and
see smear (v.)). So called from resemblance; a medical coinage, the word seems not to have been used
in its literal Greek sense in English before this. Related: Smegmatic.


magma (n.)

mid-15c., dregs, from Latin magma dregs of an ointment, from Greek magma thick unguent, ointment,
from root of  massein to knead, mold, from PIE *mag- to knead (see macerate). Geological meaning
molten rock is 1859. Related: Magmalic.


amalgam (n.)

c.1400, blend of mercury with another metal; soft mass formed by chemical manipulation, from Old
French amalgame or directly from Medieval Latin amalgama, alloy of mercury (especially with gold or
silver), an alchemists' word, perhaps an alteration of Latin malagma poultice, plaster, probably
from Arabic al-malgham an emollient poultice or unguent for sores (especially warm) [Francis
Johnson, A Dictionary of Persian, Arabic, and English], perhaps from Greek malagma softening
substance, from malassein to soften, from malakos soft.


cream (n.)

early 14c., creyme, from Old French cresme (13c., Modern French cr&egrave;me) chrism, holy oil,
blend of Late Latin chrisma ointment (from Greek khrisma unguent; see chrism) and Late Latin cramum
cream, which is perhaps from Gaulish. Replaced Old English ream. Re-borrowed 19c. from French as
creme. Figurative sense of most excellent element or part is from 1580s. Cream-cheese is from 1580s.


unctuous (adj.)

late 14c., oily, having a greasy or soapy feeling when touched, from Old French unctueus, from
Medieval Latin unctuosus greasy, from Latin unctus act of anointing, from past participle stem of
unguere to anoint (see unguent).    Figurative sense of blandly ingratiating is first recorded 1742,
perhaps in part with a literal sense, but in part a sarcastic usage from unction in the meaning deep
spiritual feeling (1690s), such as comes from having been anointed in the rite of unction. Related:
Unctuously; unctuousness.


anoint (v.)

c.1300 (implied in anointing), from Old French enoint smeared on, past participle of enoindre smear
on, from Latin inunguere to anoint, from in- on + unguere to smear (see unguent). Originally in
reference to grease or oil smeared on for medicinal purposes; its use in the Coverdale Bible in
reference to Christ (as in The Lord's Anointed; see chrism) has spiritualized the word. Related:
Anointed; anointing.


smear (v.)

Old English smerian, smierwan to anoint or rub with grease, oil, etc., from Proto-Germanic *smerwjan
to spread grease on (cognates: Old Norse smyrja to anoint, rub with ointment, Danish sm&oslash;re,
Swedish sm&ouml;rja, Dutch smeren, Old High German smirwen apply salve, smear, German schmieren to
smear; Old Norse sm&#246;r butter), from PIE *smeru- grease (cognates: Greek myron unguent, balsam,
Old Irish smi(u)r marrow, Old English smeoru fat, grease, ointment, tallow, lard, suet, Lithuanian
smarsas fat).    Figurative sense of assault a public reputation with unsubstantiated charges is
from 1879. Related: Smeared; smearing. Smear-word, one used regardless of its literal meaning but
invested with invective, is from 1938.


