uninhibited (adj.)

1880, from un- (1) not + past participle of inhibit.


swinging (adj.)

1550s, moving to and fro, present participle adjective from swing (v.). Meaning marked by a free,
sweeping movement is from 1818. Sense of uninhibited is from 1958.


hang (v.)

a fusion of Old English hon suspend (transitive, class VII strong verb; past tense heng, past
participle hangen), and Old English hangian (weak, intransitive, past tense hangode) be suspended;
also probably influenced by Old Norse hengja suspend, and hanga be suspended. All from Proto-
Germanic *hangen (intransitive) to hang (cognates: Old Frisian hangia, Dutch hangen, German
h&auml;ngen), from PIE *konk- to hang (cognates: Gothic hahan, Hittite gang- to hang, Sanskrit
sankate wavers, Latin cunctari to delay; see also second element in Stonehenge). As a method of
execution, in late Old English (but originally specifically of crucifixion).   Hung emerged as past
participle 16c. in northern England dialect, and hanged endured only in legal language (which tends
to be conservative) and metaphors extended from it (I'll be hanged). Teen slang sense of spend time
first recorded 1951; hang around idle, loiter is from 1830, and hang out (v.) is from 1811. Hang
fire (1781) was originally used of guns that were slow in communicating the fire through the vent to
the charge. To let it all hang out be relaxed and uninhibited is from 1967.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


