unique (adj.)

c.1600, single, solitary, from Middle French unique (16c.), from Latin unicus only, single, sole,
alone of its kind, from unus one (see one). Meaning forming the only one of its kind is attested
from 1610s; erroneous sense of remarkable, uncommon is attested from mid-19c. Related: Uniquely;
uniqueness.


furniture (n.)

1520s, act of furnishing, from Middle French fourniture, from fournir furnish (see furnish). Sense
of chairs, tables, etc.; household stuff (1570s) is unique to English; most other European languages
derive their words for this from Latin mobile movable.


Skee-Ball (n.)

1909, proprietary name (Skee-Ball Alley Company, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.), the first element said to
represent the old alternative spelling of ski (v.).    Skee ball bowling, in which the ball is
jumped or skeed into the pockets in the same manner as a skee-jumper rises from the bump in his
flight, is a new and unique hand-ball game that seems destined to great popularity. [Popular
Mechanics, July 1909]


sole (adj.)

single, alone, having no husband or wife; one and only, singular, unique, late 14c., from Old French
soul only, alone, just, from Latin solus alone, only, single, sole; forsaken; extraordinary, of
unknown origin, perhaps related to se oneself, from PIE reflexive root *swo- (see so).


magnify (v.)

late 14c., to speak or act for the glory or honor (of someone or something), from Old French
magnefiier glorify, magnify, from Latin magnificare esteem greatly, extol, make much of, from
magnificus great, elevated, noble (see magnificence). Meaning use a telescope or microscope is first
attested 1660s, said to be a unique development in English. Related: Magnified; magnifying.


sullen (adj.)

1570s, alteration of Middle English soleyn unique, singular, from Anglo-French *solein, formed on
the pattern of Old French solain lonely, from soul single, from Latin solus by oneself, alone (see
sole (adj.)). The sense shift in Middle English from solitary to morose (i.e. remaining alone
through ill-humor) occurred late 14c. Related: Sullenly; sullenness.


only (adj.)

Old English &aelig;nlic, anlic only, unique, solitary, literally one-like, from an one (see one) +
-lic -like (see -ly (1)). Use as an adverb and conjunction developed in Middle English. Distinction
of only and alone (now usually in reference to emotional states) is unusual; in many languages the
same word serves for both. German also has a distinction in allein/einzig. Phrase only-begotten
(mid-15c.) is biblical, translating Latin unigenitus, Greek monogenes. The Old English form was
ancenned.


any (adj.)

Old English &aelig;nig any, anyone, literally one-y, from Proto-Germanic *ainagas (cognates: Old
Saxon enig, Old Norse einigr, Old Frisian enich, Dutch enig, German einig), from PIE *oi-no- one,
unique (see one). The -y may have diminutive force here.    Emphatic form any old ______ (British
variant: any bloody ______) is recorded from 1896. At any rate is recorded from 1847. Among the
large family of compounds beginning with any-, anykyn any kind (c.1300) did not survive, and Anywhen
(1831) is rarely used, but OED calls it common in Southern [British] dialects.


union (n.)

early 15c., action of joining one thing to another, also agreement, accord, also state of matrimony,
from Anglo-French unioun, Old French union (12c.), from Late Latin unionem (nominative unio)
oneness, unity, a uniting, also in Latin meaning a single pearl or onion, from unus one, from PIE
*oi-no- one, unique (see one).    Sense of action of uniting into one political body is attested
from 1540s. Meaning group of people or states is from 1650s. Short for trade union, it is recorded
from 1833. U.S. political sense is attested from 1775; used especially during the Civil War, in
reference to the remainder of the United States after the Southern secession.


show (v.)

Old English sceawian to look at, see, gaze, behold, observe; inspect, examine; look for, choose,
from Proto-Germanic *skauwojan (cognates: Old Saxon skauwon to look at, Old Frisian skawia, Dutch
schouwen, Old High German scouwon to look at; Dutch schoon, Gothic skaunjai beautiful, originally
conspicuous), from Proto-Germanic root *skau- behold, look at, from PIE *skou-, variant of root
*skeue- to pay attention, perceive (see caveat).    Causal meaning let be seen; put in sight, make
known evolved c.1200 for unknown reasons and is unique to English (German schauen still means look
at). Spelling shew, popular 18c. and surviving into early 19c., represents obsolete pronunciation
(rhymes with view). Horse racing sense is from 1903, perhaps from an earlier sense in card-playing.


wed (v.)

Old English weddian to pledge oneself, covenant to do something, vow; betroth, marry, also unite
(two other people) in a marriage, conduct the marriage ceremony, from Proto-Germanic *wadi-
(cognates: Old Norse ve&eth;ja, Danish vedde to bet, wager, Old Frisian weddia to promise, Gothic
ga-wadjon to betroth), from PIE root *wadh- (1) to pledge, to redeem a pledge (cognates: Latin vas,
genitive vadis bail, security, Lithuanian vaduoti to redeem a pledge).    The sense has remained
closer to pledge in other Germanic languages (such as German Wette a bet, wager); development to
marry is unique to English. Originally 'make a woman one's wife by giving a pledge or earnest
money', then used of either party [Buck]. Passively, of two people, to be joined as husband and
wife, from c.1200. Related: Wedded; wedding.


gas (n.)

1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos empty space (see chaos). The sound of Dutch g is
roughly equivalent to that of Greek kh. First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644),
probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of proper elements of spirits
or ultra-rarified water, which was van Helmont's definition of gas.    Modern scientific sense began
1779, with later specialization to combustible mix of vapors (1794, originally coal gas); anesthetic
(1894, originally nitrous oxide); and poison gas (1900). Meaning intestinal vapors is from 1882. The
success of this artificial word is unique [Weekley]. Slang sense of empty talk is from 1847; slang
meaning something exciting or excellent first attested 1953, from earlier hepster slang gasser in
the same sense (1944). Gas also meant fun, a joke in Anglo-Irish and was used so by Joyce (1914). As
short for gasoline, it is American English, first recorded 1905.


one (n.)

c.1200, from Old English an (adjective, pronoun, noun) one, from Proto-Germanic *ainaz (cognates:
Old Norse einn, Danish een, Old Frisian an, Dutch een, German ein, Gothic ains), from PIE *oi-no-
one, unique (cognates: Greek oinos ace (on dice); Latin unus one; Old Persian aivam; Old Church
Slavonic -inu, ino-; Lithuanian vienas; Old Irish oin; Breton un one).    Originally pronounced as
it still is in only, and in dialectal good 'un, young 'un, etc.; the now-standard pronunciation wun
began c.14c. in southwest and west England (Tyndale, a Gloucester man, spells it won in his Bible
translation), and it began to be general 18c. Use as indefinite pronoun influenced by unrelated
French on and Latin homo.   One and only sweetheart is from 1906. One of those things unpredictable
occurrence is from 1934. Slang one-arm bandit a type of slot machine is recorded by 1938. One-night
stand is 1880 in performance sense; 1963 in sexual sense. One of the boys ordinary amiable fellow is
from 1893. One-track mind is from 1927. Drinking expression one for the road is from 1950 (as a song
title).


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


read (v.)

Old English r&aelig;dan (West Saxon), redan (Anglian) to advise, counsel, persuade; discuss,
deliberate; rule, guide; arrange, equip; forebode; read, explain; learn by reading; put in order
(related to r&aelig;d, red advice), from Proto-Germanic *redan (cognates: Old Norse ra&eth;a, Old
Frisian reda, Dutch raden, Old High German ratan, German raten to advise, counsel, guess), from PIE
root *re(i)- to reason, count (cognates: Sanskrit radh- to succeed, accomplish, Greek arithmos
number amount, Old Church Slavonic raditi to take thought, attend to, Old Irish im-radim to
deliberate, consider). Words from this root in most modern Germanic languages still mean counsel,
advise.    Sense of make out the character of (a person) is attested from 1610s. Connected to riddle
via notion of interpret. Transference to understand the meaning of written symbols is unique to Old
English and (perhaps under English influence) Old Norse ra&eth;a. Most languages use a word rooted
in the idea of gather up as their word for read (such as French lire, from Latin legere). Read up
study is from 1842; read out (v.) expel by proclamation (Society of Friends) is from 1788. read-only
in computer jargon is recorded from 1961.


stop (v.)

Old English -stoppian (in forstoppian to stop up, stifle), a general West Germanic word, cognate
with Old Saxon stuppon, West Frisian stopje, Middle Low German stoppen, Old High German stopfon,
German stopfen to plug, stop up, Old Low Frankish (be)stuppon to stop (the ears).    These words are
said by many sources to be a Germanic borrowing of Vulgar Latin *stuppare to stop or stuff with tow
or oakum (source of Italian stoppare, French &eacute;touper to stop with tow), from Latin stuppa
coarse part of flax, tow. In support of this theory, it is said that plugs made of tow were used
from ancient times in Rhine valley. Century Dictionary says this suits phonetically, but is on
grounds of meaning somewhat doubtful. Barnhart, for one, proposes the whole Germanic group might be
native, from a base *stoppon.     Sense of bring or come to a halt, discontinue (mid-15c.) is from
notion of preventing a flow by blocking a hole, and the word's development in this sense is unique
to English, though it since has been widely adopted in other languages; perhaps influenced by Latin
stupere be stunned, be stupefied. Intransitive meaning check oneself is from 1680s. Meaning make a
halt or stay, tarry is from 1711. Stop-light is from 1922; stop-sign is from 1918. Stop-motion is
from 1851, originally of looms. Related: Stopped; stopping.


