universal (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the whole of something specified; occurring everywhere, from Old French
universel general, universal (12c.), from Latin universalis of or belonging to all, from universus
all together, whole, entire (see universe). In mechanics, a universal joint (1670s) is one which
allows free movement in any direction. Universal product code is recorded from 1974.


universalism (n.)

1805 in theology, the doctrine of universal salvation, from universal (adj.) + -ism. Universalist
one who, professing the Christian faith, believes in the eventual redemption of all humanity is
attested from 1620s.


universality (n.)

late 14c., from Old French universelite (14c.) or directly from Late Latin universalitas, from Latin
universalis universal (see universal).


universally (adv.)

late 14c., from universal + -ly (2).


catholic (adj.)

mid-14c., of the doctrines of the ancient Church, literally universally accepted, from French
catholique, from Church Latin catholicus universal, general, from Greek katholikos, from phrase
kath' holou on the whole, in general, from kata about + genitive of holos whole (see safe (adj.)).
Applied to the Church in Rome c.1554, after the Reformation began. General sense of of interest to
all, universal is from 1550s.


perpetual (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French perpetuel without end (12c.) and directly from Latin perpetualis
universal, in Medieval Latin permanent, from perpetuus continuous, universal, from perpetis,
genitive of Old Latin perpes lasting, probably from per- through + root of petere to seek, go to,
aim at (see petition (n.)). Related: Perpetually. Perpetual motion is attested from 1590s.


waterlogged (adj.)

1759 (in an account of the Battle of Lagos in Universal Magazine, September), from water (n.1) + log
(n.); the notion apparently is of reduce to a log-like condition.     WATER LOGGED, the state of a
ship when, by receiving a great quantity of water into her hold, by leaking, &amp;c.;, she has
become heavy and inactive upon the sea, so as to yield without resistance to the efforts of every
wave rushing over her decks. As, in this dangerous situation, the center of gravity is no longer
fixed, but fluctuating from place to place, the stability of the ship is utterly lost. She is
therefore almost totally deprived of the use of her sails, which would operate to overset her, or
press the head under water. Hence there is no resource for the crew, except to free her by the
pumps, or to abandon her by the boats as soon as possible. [William Falconer, An Universal
Dictionary of the Marine, London, 1784]    The verb waterlog (1779) appears to be a back-formation.


usb

initialism (acronym) for universal serial bus, by 1994.


pessimist (n.)

1820, one who habitually expects the worst (Knowles' dictionary, 1835, defines it as A universal
complainer), from 19c. French pessimiste (see pessimism).


Eiffel Tower

erected in the Champ-de-Mars for the Paris Universal Exposition of 1889; at 984.25 feet the world's
tallest structure at the time. Designed by French engineer Alexandre Gustave Eiffel (1832-1923).


alkahest (n.)

universal solvent sought by alchemists, 1640s, from French alcahest, from Medieval Latin alcahest, a
pseudo-Arabic word coined by Paracelsus (see alchemy).


Ermentrude

fem. proper name, from Old High German Ermentrudis, from ermin whole, universal + trut beloved,
dear.


dad (n.)

recorded from c.1500, but probably much older, from child's speech, nearly universal and probably
prehistoric (compare Welsh tad, Irish daid, Czech, Latin, Greek tata, Lithuanian tete, Sanskrit
tatah, all of the same meaning).


brahmin (n.)

member of Boston's upper class, 1823, figurative use of Brahman member of the highest priestly Hindu
caste, late 15c., from Sanskrit brahmana-s, from brahman- prayer, also the universal soul, the
Absolute, of uncertain origin. Related to Brahma.


nirvana (n.)

1836, from Sanskrit nirvana-s extinction, disappearance (of the individual soul into the universal),
literally to blow out, a blowing out (not transitively, but as a fire ceases to draw; a literal
Latinization would be de-spiration), from nis-, nir- out + va- to blow (see wind (n.1)). Figurative
sense of perfect bliss is from 1895.


Panthalassa (n.)

universal sea, such as that which surrounded Pangaea, 1893 (Suess), from pan- all (see pan-) + Greek
thalassa sea (see thalasso-).


ubiquity (n.)

omnipresence, 1570s, from Modern Latin ubiquitas, from Latin ubique everywhere, from ubi where (see
ubi) + que any, also, and, ever, as a suffix giving universal meaning to the word it is attached to,
from PIE root *kwe and. Originally a Lutheran theological position maintaining the omnipresence of
Christ.


bobby sox

1943, from diminutive of bob (n.2) + sox. So called because they are shortened compared to knee-
socks. Derivative bobby-soxer first attested 1944.    Months ago colored bobby sox folded at the top
were decreed, not by anyone or any group but, as usual, by a sudden mysterious and universal
acceptance of the new idea. Now no teen-ager dares wear anything but pure white socks without a
fold. [Life magazine, Dec. 11, 1944]


Esperanto (n.)

1892, from Doktoro Esperanto, whose name means in Esperanto, one who hopes, pen name used on the
title page of a book about the artificial would-be universal language published 1887 by its
inventor, Lazarus Ludwig Zamenhof (1859-1917). Compare Spanish esperanza hope, from esperar, from
Latin sperare (see sperate). For initial e- see e-.


varsity (adj.)

1825, university, variant of earlier versity (1670s), shortened form of university. Compare varsal
(1690s), short for universal; varmint from vermin; and Grose's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue
(1788) has vardy as slang for verdict. Used in English universities, and affected to some extent in
American colleges [Century Dictionary].


larva (n.)

1650s, a ghost, specter, from Latin larva (plural larvae), earlier larua ghost, also mask; applied
in biological sense 1768 by Linnaeus because immature forms of insects mask the adult forms. On the
double sense of the Latin word, Carlo Ginzburg, among other students of mythology and folklore, has
commented on the well-nigh universal association between masks and the spirits of the dead.


global (adj.)

1670s, spherical, from globe + -al (1). Meaning worldwide, universal is from 1892, from French.
Global village first attested 1960, popularized, if not coined, by Canadian educator Marshall
McLuhan (1911-1980).Postliterate man's electronic media contract the world to a village or tribe
where everything happens to everyone at the same time: everyone knows about, and therefore
participates in, everything that is happening the minute it happens. Television gives this quality
of simultaneity to events in the global village. [Carpenter &amp; McLuhan, Explorations in
Communication, 1960]


ecumenical (adj.)

late 16c., representing the entire (Christian) world, formed in English as an ecclesiastical word,
from Late Latin oecumenicus general, universal, from Greek oikoumenikos, from he oikoumene ge the
inhabited world (as known to the ancient Greeks); the Greeks and their neighbors considered as
developed human society, from oikoumenos, present passive participle of oikein inhabit, from oikos
house, habitation (see villa).


panacea (n.)

universal remedy, 1540s, from Latin panacea, a herb (variously identified) that would heal all
illnesses, from Greek panakeia cure-all, from panakes all-healing, from pan- all (see pan-) + akos
cure, from iasthai to heal (see -iatric). Earlier in English as panace (1510s).


guillotine (n.)

The name of the machine in which the axe descends in grooves from a considerable height so that the
stroke is certain and the head instantly severed from the body. [Universal Magazine of Knowledge and
Pleasure, January 1793], 1791, from French guillotine, named in recognition of French physician
Joseph Guillotin (1738-1814), who as deputy to the National Assembly (1789) proposed, for
humanitarian and efficiency reasons, that capital punishment be carried out by beheading quickly and
cleanly on a machine, which was built in 1791 and first used the next year. The verb is first
attested 1794. Related: Guillotined; guillotining.


Manichaeism (n.)

1550s, the religion of the Manichees (late 14c.) a Gnostic Christian sect named for its founder,
Mani (Latin Manich&aelig;us), c.215-275, Syriac-speaking apostle from a Jesus cult in Mesopotamia in
240s, who taught a universal religion. Vegetarian and visionary, they saw particles of light and
goodness trapped in evil matter and regarded Satan as co-eternal with God. The universe was a scene
of struggle between good and evil. The sect was characterized by dualism and a double-standard of
perfectionist elects and a larger group of fellow travelers who would require several reincarnations
before their particles of light would be liberated.


almighty (adj.)

Old English &aelig;lmihtig all-powerful, also a by-name of God; compound of &aelig;l (see all) +
mihtig (see mighty); common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon alomahtig, Old High German alamahtic,
German allm&auml;chtig, Old Norse almattigr), perhaps an early Germanic loan-translation of Latin
omnipotens (see omnipotent).The almighty dollar, that great object of universal devotion throughout
our land. [Washington Irving, 1836]  Related: Almightily.


surname (n.)

c.1300, name, title, or epithet added to a person's name, from sur above (from Latin super-; see
sur- (1)) + name (n.); modeled on Anglo-French surnoun surname (early 14c.), variant of Old French
sornom, from sur over + nom name. As family name from late 14c.    An Old English word for this was
freonama, literally free name. Meaning family name is first found late 14c. Hereditary surnames
existed among Norman nobility in England in early 12c., among the common people they began to be
used 13c., increasingly frequent until near universal by end of 14c. The process was later in the
north of England than the south. The verb is attested from 1510s. Related: Surnamed.


personality (n.)

late 14c., quality or fact of being a person, from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative
personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of a distinctive character is first
recorded 1795, from French personnalit&eacute;.Personality is the supreme realization of the innate
idiosyncrasy of a living being. It is an act of courage flung in the face of life, the absolute
affirmation of all that constitutes the individual, the most successful adaptation to the universal
conditions of existence, coupled with the greatest possible freedom of self-determination. [C.G.
Jung, 1875-1961]Meaning person whose character stands out from that of others is from 1889.
Personality cult is attested from 1956.


animism (n.)

1866, reintroduced by English anthropologist Sir Edward Burnett Taylor (1832-1917), who defined it
(1871) as the theory of the universal animation of nature, from Latin anima life, breath, soul (see
animus) + -ism.    Earlier sense was of doctrine that animal life is produced by an immaterial soul
(1832), from German Animismus, coined c.1720 by physicist/chemist Georg Ernst Stahl (1660-1734)
based on the concept of the anima mundi. Animist is attested from 1819, in Stahl's sense; animisic
is first recorded 1871.


cant (n.1)

insincere talk, 1709, earlier it was slang for whining of beggars (1640s), from the verb in this
sense (1560s), from Old North French canter (Old French chanter) to sing, chant, from Latin cantare,
frequentative of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Sense in English developed after 1680 to mean the
jargon of criminals and vagabonds, thence applied contemptuously by any sect or school to the
phraseology of its rival.    ... Slang is universal, whilst Cant is restricted in usage to certain
classes of the community: thieves, vagrom men, and -- well, their associates. ... Slang boasts a
quasi-respectability denied to Cant, though Cant is frequently more enduring, its use continuing
without variation of meaning for many generations. [John S. Farmer, Forewords to Musa Pedestris,
1896]


exploitation (n.)

1803, productive working of something, a positive word among those who used it first, though
regarded as a Gallicism, from French exploitation, noun of action from exploiter (see exploit (v.)).
Bad sense developed 1830s-50s, in part from influence of French socialist writings (especially Saint
Simon), also perhaps influenced by U.S. anti-slavery writing; and the insulting word was hurled at
activities it once had crowned as praise.    It follows from this science [conceived by Saint
Simon] that the tendency of the human race is from a state of antagonism to that of an universal
peaceful association -- from the dominating influence of the military spirit to that of the
industriel one; from what they call l'exploitation de l'homme par l'homme to the exploitation of the
globe by industry. [Quarterly Review, April &amp; July 1831]


robot (n.)

1923, from English translation of 1920 play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots), by Karel Capek
(1890-1938), from Czech robotnik slave, from robota forced labor, compulsory service, drudgery, from
robotiti to work, drudge, from an Old Czech source akin to Old Church Slavonic rabota servitude,
from rabu slave, from Old Slavic *orbu-, from PIE *orbh- pass from one status to another (see
orphan). The Slavic word thus is a cousin to German Arbeit work (Old High German arabeit). According
to Rawson the word was popularized by Karel Capek's play, but was coined by his brother Josef (the
two often collaborated), who used it initially in a short story.


mamma (n.)

1570s, representing the native form of the reduplication of *ma- that is nearly universal among the
Indo-European languages (Greek mamme mother, grandmother, Latin mamma, Persian mama, Russian and
Lithuanian mama mother, German Muhme mother's sister, French maman, Welsh mam mother). Probably a
natural sound in baby-talk, perhaps imitative of sound made while sucking.    Its late appearance in
English is curious, but Middle English had mome (mid-13c.) an aunt; an old woman, also an
affectionate term of address for an older woman. In educated usage, the stress is always on the last
syllable. In terms of recorded usage of related words in English, mama is from 1707, mum is from
1823, mummy in this sense from 1839, mommy 1844, momma 1852, and mom 1867.


step (v.)

Old English steppan (Anglian), st&aelig;ppan (West Saxon) take a step, from West Germanic *stap-
tread (cognates: Old Frisian stapa, Middle Dutch, Dutch stappen, Old High German stapfon, German
stapfen step), from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; to support, place firmly on (see staff (n.);
cognates: Old Church Slavonic stopa step, pace, stepeni step, degree). The notion is perhaps a
treading firmly on; a foothold.    Transitive sense (as in step foot in) attested from 1530s.
Related: Stepped; stepping. Originally strong (past tense stop, past participle bestapen); weak
forms emerged 13c., universal from 16c. To step out leave for a short time is from 1530s; meaning to
go out in public in style is from 1907. Step on it hurry up is 1923, from notion of gas pedal.


common (adj.)

c.1300, belonging to all, general, from Old French comun common, general, free, open, public (9c.,
Modern French commun), from Latin communis in common, public, shared by all or many; general, not
specific; familiar, not pretentious, from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, compound adjective formed
from *ko- together + *moi-n-, suffixed form of root *mei- (1) change, exchange (see mutable), hence
literally shared by all.    Second element of the compound also is the source of Latin munia duties,
public duties, functions, those related to munia office. Perhaps reinforced in Old French by the
Germanic form of PIE *ko-moin-i- (compare Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public, general,
universal; see mean (adj.)), which came to French via Frankish.    Used disparagingly of women and
criminals since c.1300. Common pleas is 13c., from Anglo-French communs plets, hearing civil actions
by one subject against another as opposed to pleas of the crown. Common prayer is contrasted with
private prayer. Common stock is attested from 1888.


to (prep.)

Old English to in the direction of, for the purpose of, furthermore, from West Germanic *to
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian to, Dutch too, Old High German zuo, German zu to), from PIE
pronomial base *do- to, toward, upward (cognates: Latin donec as long as, Old Church Slavonic do as
far as, to, Greek suffix -de to, toward, Old Irish do, Lithuanian da-), from demonstrative *de-.
Not found in Scandinavian, where the equivalent of till (prep.) is used. In Old English, the
preposition (go to town) leveled with the adverb (the door slammed to) except where the adverb
retained its stress (tired and hungry too); there it came to be written with -oo (see too).    The
nearly universal use of to with infinitives (to sleep, to dream, etc.) arose in Middle English out
of the Old English dative use of to, and it helped drive out the Old English inflectional endings
(though in this use to itself is a mere sign, without meaning).    Commonly used as a prefix in
Middle English (to-hear listen to, etc.), but few of these survive (to-do, together, and time
references such as today, tonight, tomorrow -- Chaucer also has to-yeere). To and fro side to side
is attested from mid-14c. Phrase what's it to you how does that concern you? (1819) is a modern form
of an old question:    Hu&aelig;d is &eth;ec &eth;&aelig;s?  [John xxi:22, in Lindisfarne Gospel,
c.950]


V

In Middle English, -u- and -v- were used interchangeably, though with a preference for v- as the
initial letter (vnder, vain, etc.) and -u- elsewhere (full, euer, etc.). The distinction into
consonant and vowel identities was established in English by 1630, under influence of continental
printers, but into 19c. some dictionaries and other catalogues continued to list -u- and -v- words
as a single series.    No native Anglo-Saxon words begin in v- except those (vane, vat, vixen)
altered by the southwestern England habit of replacing initial f- with v- (and initial s- with z-).
Confusion of -v- and -w- also was a characteristic of 16c. Cockney accents.    As a Roman numeral,
five. In German rocket weapons systems of World War II, it stood for Vergeltungswaffe reprisal
weapon. V-eight as a type of motor engine is recorded from 1929 (V-engine is attested from 1909), so
called for the arrangement. The V for victory hand sign was conceived January 1941 by Belgian
politician and resistance leader Victor de Laveleye, to signify French victoire and Flemish vrijheid
(freedom). It was broadcast into Europe by Radio Belgi&#235;/Radio Belgique and popularized by the
BBC by June 1941, from which time it became a universal allied gesture.


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


mean (adj.1)

low-quality, c.1200, shared by all, from imene, from Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public,
general, universal, shared by all, from Proto-Germanic *ga-mainiz possessed jointly (cognates: Old
Frisian mene, Old Saxon gimeni, Middle Low German gemeine, Middle Dutch gemene, Dutch gemeen, German
gemein, Gothic gamains common), from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, a compound adjective formed
from collective prefix *ko- together (Proto-Germanic *ga-) + *moi-n-, suffixed form of PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable). Compare second element in common (adj.), a word with a
sense evolution parallel to that of this word.  Of things, inferior, second-rate, from late 14c. (a
secondary sense in Old English was false, wicked). Notion of so-so, mediocre led to confusion with
mean (n.). Meaning inferior in rank or status (of persons) emerged early 14c.; that of ordinary from
late 14c.; that of stingy, nasty first recorded 1660s; weaker sense of disobliging, pettily
offensive is from 1839, originally American English slang. Inverted sense of remarkably good (i.e.
plays a mean saxophone) first recorded c.1900, perhaps from phrase no mean _______ not inferior
(1590s, also, not average, reflecting further confusion with mean (n.)).


R

In a circle, meaning registered (trademark), first incorporated in U.S. statues 1946. R&R; rest and
relaxation, first recorded 1953, American English; R&B; rhythm and blues (type of popular music)
first attested 1949, American English.    If all our r's that are written are pronounced, the sound
is more common than any other in English utterance (over seven per cent.); the instances of
occurrence before a vowel, and so of universal pronunciation, are only half as frequent. There are
localities where the normal vibration of the tip of the tongue is replaced by one of the uvula,
making a guttural trill, which is still more entitled to the name of dog's letter than is the
ordinary r; such are considerable parts of France and Germany; the sound appears to occur only
sporadically in English pronunciation. [Century Dictionary]   <hr />   The moment we encounter the
added r's of purp or dorg in our reading we know that we have to do with humor, and so with school-
marm. The added consonants are supposed to be spoken, if the words are uttered, but, as a matter of
fact, they are less often uttered than seen. The words are, indeed, largely visual forms; the humor
is chiefly for the eye. [Louise Pound, The Humorous 'R,' American Mercury, October 1924]    She goes
on to note that in British humorous writing, -ar popularly indicates the sound of the vowel in
father and formations like larf (for laugh) are to be read with the broad vowel but no uttered r.
She also quotes Henry James on the characteristic prominence of the medial -r- sound (which tends to
be dropped in England and New England) in the speech of the U.S. Midwest, under some strange impulse
received toward consonantal recovery of balance, making it present even in words from which it is
absent, bringing it in everywhere as with the small vulgar effect of a sort of morose grinding of
the back teeth.


ring (n.1)

circular band, Old English hring small circlet, especially one of metal for wearing on the finger or
as part of a mail coat; anything circular, from Proto-Germanic *hringaz something curved, circle
(cognates: Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hring, Danish, Swedish, Dutch ring, Old High German hring,
German Ring), from PIE *(s)kregh- nasalized form of (s)kregh-, from root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend,
with wide-ranging derivative senses (cognates: Latin curvus bent, curved, crispus curly; Old Church
Slavonic kragu circle, and perhaps Greek kirkos ring, koronos curved).    Other Old English senses
were circular group of persons, also horizon. Meaning place for prize fight and wrestling bouts
(early 14c.) is from the space in a circle of bystanders in the midst of which such contests once
were held, ... a circle formed for boxers, wrestlers, and cudgel players, by a man styled Vinegar;
who, with his hat before his eyes, goes round the circle, striking at random with his whip to
prevent the populace from crowding in [Grose, 1785]. Meaning combination of interested persons is
from 1829. Of trees, from 1670s; fairy ring is from 1620s. Ring finger is Old English hringfingr, a
compound found in other Germanic languages. To run rings round (someone) be superior to is from
1891.    Nursery rhyme ring a ring a rosie is attested in an American form (with a different ending)
from c.1790. The belief that the rhyme originated with the Great Plague is now almost universal, but
has no evidence to support it and is almost certainly nonsense [Oxford Dictionary of English
Folklore]. This proposal of connection dates only to the late 1960s.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


th

A sound found chiefly in words of Old English, Old Norse or Greek origin, unpronounceable by Normans
and many other Europeans. In Greek, the sound corresponds etymologically to Sanskrit -dh- and
English -d-; and it was represented graphically by -TH- and at first pronounced as a true aspirate
(as still in English outhouse, shithead, etc.). But by 2c. B.C.E. the Greek letter theta was in
universal use and had the modern -th- sound. Latin had neither the letter nor the sound, however,
and the Romans represented Greek theta by -TH-, which they generally pronounced, at least in Late
Latin, as simple -t- (passed down to Romanic languages, as in Spanish termal thermal, teoria theory,
teatro theater).    In Germanic languages it represents PIE *-t- and was common at the start of
words or after stressed vowels. To represent it, Old English and Old Norse used the characters &eth;
eth (a modified form of -d-) and &thorn; thorn, which originally was a rune. Old English, unlike Old
Norse, seems never to have standardized which of the two versions of the sound (hard and soft) was
represented by which of the two letters.    The digraph -th- sometimes appears in early Old English,
on the Roman model, and it returned in Middle English with the French scribes, driving out eth by
c.1250, but thorn persisted, especially in demonstratives (&thorn;at, &thorn;e, &thorn;is, etc.),
even as other words were being spelled with -th-. The advent of printing dealt its death-blow,
however, as types were imported from continental founders, who had no thorn. For a time y was used
in its place (especially in Scotland), because it had a similar shape, hence ye for the in
historical tourist trap Ye Olde _______ Shoppe (it never was pronounced ye, only spelled that way).
The awareness that some Latin words in t- were from Greek th- encouraged over-correction in English
and created unetymological forms such as Thames and author, while some words borrowed from Romanic
languages preserve, on the Roman model, the Greek -th- spelling but the simple Latin t pronunciation
(as in Thomas and thyme).


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


cat (n.)

Old English catt (c.700), from West Germanic (c.400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (cognates: Old
Frisian katte, Old Norse k&ouml;ttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late
Latin cattus.    The near-universal European word now, it appeared in Europe as Latin catta
(Martial, c.75 C.E.), Byzantine Greek katta (c.350) and was in general use on the continent by
c.700, replacing Latin feles. Probably ultimately Afro-Asiatic (compare Nubian kadis, Berber
kadiska, both meaning cat). Arabic qitt tomcat may be from the same source. Cats were domestic in
Egypt from c.2000 B.C.E., but not a familiar household animal to classical Greeks and Romans. The
nine lives have been proverbial since at least 1560s.    The Late Latin word also is the source of
Old Irish and Gaelic cat, Welsh kath, Breton kaz, Italian gatto, Spanish gato, French chat (12c.).
Independent, but ultimately from the same source are words in the Slavic group: Old Church Slavonic
kotuka, kotel'a, Bulgarian kotka, Russian ko&#353;ka, Polish kot, along with Lithuanian kate and
non-Indo-European Finnish katti, which is from Lithuanian.    Extended to lions, tigers, etc.
c.1600. As a term of contempt for a woman, from early 13c. Slang sense of prostitute is from at
least c.1400. Slang sense of fellow, guy, is from 1920, originally in U.S. Black English; narrower
sense of jazz enthusiast is recorded from 1931.   Cat's paw (1769, but cat's foot in the same sense,
1590s) refers to old folk tale in which the monkey tricks the cat into pawing chestnuts from a fire;
the monkey gets the nuts, the cat gets a burnt paw. Cat bath hurried or partial cleaning is from
1953. Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth. Cat-witted small-minded, obstinate, and
spiteful (1670s) deserved to survive. For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas, see bee's knees.


nigger (n.)

1786, earlier neger (1568, Scottish and northern England dialect), from French n&egrave;gre, from
Spanish negro (see Negro). From the earliest usage it was the term that carries with it all the
obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks [cited in Gowers, 1965,
probably Harold R. Isaacs]. But as black inferiority was at one time a near universal assumption in
English-speaking lands, the word in some cases could be used without deliberate insult. More
sympathetic writers late 18c. and early 19c. seem to have used black (n.) and, after the American
Civil War, colored person.  You're a fool nigger, and the worst day's work Pa ever did was to buy
you, said Scarlett slowly. ... There, she thought, I've said nigger and Mother wouldn't like that at
all. [Margaret Mitchell, Gone With the Wind, 1936]  Also applied by English settlers to dark-skinned
native peoples in India, Australia, Polynesia. The reclamation of the word as a neutral or positive
term in black culture (not universally regarded as a worthwhile enterprise), often with a suggestion
of soul or style, is attested first in the U.S. South, later (1968) in the Northern, urban-based
Black Power movement.    Used in combinations (such as nigger-brown) since 1840s for various dark
brown or black hues or objects; euphemistic substitutions (such as Zulu) began to appear in these
senses c.1917. Brazil nuts were called nigger toes by 1896. Variant niggah, attested from 1925
(without the -h, from 1969), is found usually in situations where blacks use the word. Nigra (1944),
on the other hand, in certain uses reflects a pronunciation of negro meant to suggest nigger, and is
thus deemed (according to a 1960 slang dictionary) even more derog[atory] than 'nigger.'  Slang
phrase nigger in the woodpile attested by 1800; A mode of accounting for the disappearance of fuel;
an unsolved mystery [R.H. Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Nigger heaven the top gallery in a
(segregated) theater first attested 1878 in reference to Troy, N.Y.


charade (n.)

1776, from French charade (18c.), probably from Proven&ccedil;al charrado long talk, chatter, of
obscure origin, perhaps from charrar to chatter, gossip, of echoic origin. Compare Italian ciarlare,
Spanish charlar to talk, prattle. Originally not silent, but relying rather on enigmatic
descriptions of the words or syllables.    As we have ever made it a Rule to shew our Attention to
the Reader, by 'catching the Manners living, as they rise,' as Mr. Pope expresses it, we think
ourselves obliged to give Place to the following Specimens of a new Kind of SMALL WIT, which, for
some Weeks past, has been the Subject of Conversation in almost every Society, from the Court to the
Cottage. The CHARADE is, in fact, a near Relation of the old Rebus. It is usually formed from a Word
of two Syllables; the first Syllable is described by the Writer; then the second; they are
afterwards united and the whole Word marked out .... [supplement to The Universal Magazine of
Knowledge and Pleasure, volumes 58-59, 1776]    Among the examples given are:    My first makes all
nature appear of one face;  At the next we find music, and beauty and grace;  And, if this Charade
is most easily read,  I think that the third shou'd be thrown at my head.  [The answer is snow-
ball.]    The silent form, the main modern form, was at first a variant known as dumb charades and
at first it was not a speed contest; rather it adhered to the old pattern, and the performing team
acted out all the parts in order before the audience team began to guess.    There is one species of
charade which is performed solely by dumb motions, somewhat resembling the child's game of trades
and professions; but the acting charade is a much more amusing. and more difficult matter. [Goldoni,
and Modern Italian Comedy, in The Foreign And Colonial Quarterly Review, Volume 6, 1846]    An 1850
book, Acting Charades, reports that Charades en Action were all the rage in French society, and that
Lately, the game has been introduced into the drawing-rooms of a few mirth-loving Englishmen. Its
success has been tremendous.  Welsh siarad obviously is a loan-word from French or English, but its
meaning of speak, a talk is closer to the Proven&ccedil;al original.


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


time (n.)

Old English tima limited space of time, from Proto-Germanic *timon- time (cognates: Old Norse timi
time, proper time, Swedish timme an hour), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- cut up,
divide (see tide (n.)).    Abstract sense of time as an indefinite continuous duration is recorded
from late 14c. Personified since at least 1509 as an aged bald man (but with a forelock) carrying a
scythe and an hour-glass. In English, a single word encompasses time as extent and point (French
temps/fois, German zeit/mal) as well as hour (as in what time is it? compare French heure, German
Uhr). Extended senses such as occasion, the right time, leisure, or times (v.) multiplied by
developed in Old and Middle English, probably as a natural outgrowth of such phrases as He commends
her a hundred times to God (Old French La comande a Deu cent foiz).  to have a good time ( = a time
of enjoyment) was common in Eng. from c 1520 to c 1688; it was app. retained in America, whence
readopted in Britain in 19th c. [OED]   Time of day (now mainly preserved in negation, i.e. what
someone won't give you if he doesn't like you) was a popular 17c. salutation (as in Good time of day
vnto your Royall Grace, Richard III, I.iii.18). The times the current age is from 1590s. Behind the
times old-fashioned is recorded from 1831. Times as the name of a newspaper dates from 1788.   Time
warp first attested 1954; time-traveling in the science fiction sense first recorded 1895 in H.G.
Wells' The Time Machine. Time capsule first recorded 1938, in reference to the one deemed capable of
resisting the effects of time for five thousand years preserving an account of universal
achievements embedded in the grounds of the New York World's fair.    Jones [archaeologist of A.D.
5139] potters about for a while in the region which we have come to regard as New York, finds
countless ruins, but little of interest to the historian except a calcified direction sheet to
something called a Time Capsule. Jones finds the capsule but cannot open it, and decides, after
considerable prying at the lid, that it is merely evidence of an archaic tribal ceremony called a
publicity gag of which he has already found many examples. [Princeton Alumni Weekly, April 14, 1939]
To do time serve a prison sentence is from 1865. Time frame is attested by 1964; time-limit is from
1880. About time, ironically for long past due time, is recorded from 1920.


