unkempt (adj.)

1570s, from un- (1) not + kempt well-combed, neat, from variant past participle of Middle English
kemben to comb, from Old English cemban to comb, from Proto-Germanic *kambijan, from *kamb- comb
(see comb (n.)). Form unkembed is recorded from late 14c. The verb kemb is rare after 1400s, but its
negative past participle form endures.


kempt (adj.)

well-combed, neat, late 14c., from past tense of dialectal kemb, from Old English cemdan (see
unkempt). A rare word after c.1500; any modern use probably is a whimsical back-formation from
unkempt.


Huron

the North American lake is named for the Indian people, whose name is from obsolete French huron
bristle-haired (the French word frequently was used in reference to head-dresses, and that might be
its original sense here), from Old French hur&eacute; bristly, unkempt, shaggy, of uncertain origin,
but French sources indicate it probably is from Germanic.


wooly (adj.)

also woolly, 1570s, resembling or made of wool, from wool + -y (2). Meaning barbarous, rude is
recorded 1891, from wild and wooly (1884) applied to the U.S. western frontier, perhaps in reference
to range steers or to unkempt cowboys. Related: Wooliness.


comb (v.)

late 14c. (implied in past participle kombid), verb derived from comb (n.); replacing the former
verb, Old English cemban, which however survives in unkempt. Related: Combed; combing.


shaggy (adj.)

rough, coarse, unkempt, 1590s, from shag (n.) + -y (2). Related: Shaggily; shagginess. Earlier was
shagged, from Old English sceacgede hairy; compare Old Norse skeggja&#240;r, Danish sk&#230;gget
bearded. The shaggy-dog story as a type of joke is attested from 1944, perhaps from vaudeville.


dog (n.)

Old English docga, a late, rare word used of a powerful breed of canine. It forced out Old English
hund (the general Germanic and Indo-European word; see canine) by 16c. and subsequently was picked
up in many continental languages (French dogue (16c.), Danish dogge), but the origin remains one of
the great mysteries of English etymology.    Many expressions -- a dog's life (c.1600), go to the
dogs (1610s), etc. -- reflect earlier hard use of the animals as hunting accessories, not pampered
pets. In ancient times, the dog was the worst throw in dice (attested in Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit,
where the word for the lucky player was literally the dog-killer), which plausibly explains the
Greek word for danger, kindynas, which appears to be play the dog.    Slang meaning ugly woman is
from 1930s; that of sexually aggressive man is from 1950s. Adjectival phrase dog-eat-dog attested by
1850s. Dog tag is from 1918. To dog-ear a book is from 1650s; dog-eared in extended sense of worn,
unkempt is from 1894. Notwithstanding, as a dog hath a day, so may I perchance have time to declare
it in deeds. [Princess Elizabeth, 1550]  Phrase put on the dog get dressed up (1934) may look back
to the stiff stand-up shirt collars that in the 1890s were the height of male fashion (and were
known as dog-collars at least from 1883), with reference to collars worn by dogs. The common Spanish
word for dog, perro, also is a mystery word of unknown origin, perhaps from Iberian. A group of
Slavic dog words (Old Church Slavonic pisu, Polish pies, Serbo-Croatian pas) likewise are of unknown
origin.


