unruly (adj.)

disposed to resist lawful restraint, c.1400, from un- (1) not + obsolete ruly (adj.) amenable to
rule. Related: Unruliness.


Peck&#039;s bad boy

unruly or mischievous child, 1883, from fictional character created by George Wilbur Peck
(1840-1916).


untoward (adj.)

1520s, not having inclination (to or for something), also difficult to manage, unruly, from un- (1)
not + toward (adj.).


turbulent (adj.)

early 15c., disorderly, tumultuous, unruly (of persons), from Middle French turbulent (12c.), from
Latin turbulentus full of commotion, restless, disturbed, boisterous, stormy, figuratively troubled,
confused, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). In reference to weather, from 1570s. Related:
Turbulently.


act (v.)

mid-15c., to act upon or adjudicate a legal case; 1590s in the theatrical sense, from Latin actus,
past participle of agere (see act (n.)). To act up be unruly is from 1903. To act out behave anti-
socially (1974) is from psychiatric sense of expressing one's unconscious impulses or desires.
Related: Acted; acting.


haggard (adj.)

1560s, wild, unruly (originally in reference to hawks), from Middle French haggard, probably from
Old French faulcon hagard wild falcon, literally falcon of the woods, from Middle High German hag
hedge, copse, wood, from Proto-Germanic *hagon-, from PIE root *kagh- to catch, seize; also
wickerwork, fence (see hedge). OED, however, finds this whole derivation very doubtful. Sense
perhaps reinforced by Low German hager gaunt, haggard. Sense of with a haunted expression first
recorded 1690s, that of careworn first recorded 1853. Sense influenced by association with hag.
Related: Haggardly; haggardness.


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


lust (n.)

Old English lust desire, appetite, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *lustuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Dutch, German lust, Old Norse lyst, Gothic lustus pleasure, desire, lust), from PIE *las-
to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Latin lascivus wanton, playful, lustful; see lascivious).
In Middle English, any source of pleasure or delight, also an appetite, also a liking for a person,
also fertility (of soil). Sense of sinful sexual desire, degrading animal passion (now the main
meaning) developed in late Old English from the word's use in Bible translations (such as lusts of
the flesh to render Latin concupiscentia carnis [I John ii:16]); the cognate words in other Germanic
languages tend still to mean simply pleasure.


