unsavory (adj.)

also unsavoury, early 13c., tasteless, insipid, from un- (1) not + savory (adj.). Meaning unpleasant
or disagreeable to the taste is attested from late 14c.; of persons, from c.1400. Related:
Unsavoriness.


jukebox (n.)

1937, jook organ, from jook joint roadhouse (1935), Black English slang, from juke, joog wicked,
disorderly, in Gullah (the creolized English of the coastlands of South Carolina, Georgia, and
northern Florida), probably from Wolof and Bambara dzug unsavory. Said to have originated in central
Florida (see A Note on Juke, Florida Review, vol. VII, no. 3, spring 1938). The spelling with a -u-
might represent a deliberate attempt to put distance between the word and its origins.    For a long
time the commercial juke trade resisted the name juke box and even tried to raise a big publicity
fund to wage a national campaign against it, but juke box turned out to be the biggest advertising
term that could ever have been invented for the commercial phonograph and spread to the ends of the
world during the war as American soldiers went abroad but remembered the juke boxes back home.
[Billboard, Sept. 15, 1945]


Dutch (adj.)

late 14c., used first of Germans generally, after c.1600 of Hollanders, from Middle Dutch duutsch,
from Old High German duit-isc, corresponding to Old English &thorn;eodisc belonging to the people,
used especially of the common language of Germanic people, from &thorn;eod people, race, nation,
from Proto-Germanic *theudo popular, national (see Teutonic), from PIE root *teuta- people
(cognates: Old Irish tuoth people, Old Lithuanian tauta people, Old Prussian tauto country, Oscan
touto community).    As a language name, first recorded as Latin theodice, 786 C.E. in
correspondence between Charlemagne's court and the Pope, in reference to a synodical conference in
Mercia; thus it refers to Old English. First reference to the German language (as opposed to a
Germanic one) is two years later. The sense was extended from the language to the people who spoke
it (in German, Diutisklant, ancestor of Deutschland, was in use by 13c.).    Sense narrowed to of
the Netherlands in 17c., after they became a united, independent state and the focus of English
attention and rivalry. In Holland, Duits (formerly duitsch) is used of the people of Germany. The
Middle English sense survives in Pennsylvania Dutch, name of the people who immigrated from the
Rhineland and Switzerland.    Since c.1600, Dutch (adj.) has been a pejorative label pinned by
English speakers on almost anything they regard as inferior, irregular, or contrary to 'normal'
(i.e., their own) practice [Rawson]. E.g. Dutch treat (1887), Dutch uncle (1838), etc. -- probably
exceeded in such usage only by Indian and Irish -- reflecting first British commercial and military
rivalry and later heavy German immigration to U.S.    The Dutch themselves spoke English well enough
to understand the unsavory connotations of the label and in 1934 Dutch officials were ordered by
their government to stop using the term Dutch. Instead, they were to rewrite their sentences so as
to employ the official The Netherlands. [Rawson]   Dutch oven is from 1769; OED lists it among the
words describing things from Holland, but perhaps it is here used in the slighting sense. Dutch elm
disease (1927) so called because it was first discovered in Holland (caused by fungus Ceratocystis
ulmi).


