untenable (adj.)

1640s, indefensible, incapable of being held against attack, from un- (1) not + tenable (adj.).
Figurative sense is recorded from 1690s.


tankard (n.)

late 14c., large tub-like vessel, corresponding to Middle Dutch tanckaert, meaning the same thing,
but both of unknown origin. A guess hazarded in OED is that it is a transposition of *kantard, from
Latin cantharus. Klein suggests French tant quart as much as a quarter. The notion that the word is
from tank 1 + -ard is wholly untenable [Century Dictionary]. Meaning drinking vessel is first
recorded late 15c.


fustian (n.)

thick cotton cloth, c.1200, from Old French fustaigne, from Medieval Latin fustaneum, probably from
Latin fustis staff, stick of wood, probably a loan-translation of Greek xylina lina linens of wood
(i.e. cotton), but the Medieval Latin word also is sometimes said to be from Fostat, town near Cairo
where this cloth was manufactured. [Klein finds this derivation untenable.] Figurative sense of
pompous, inflated language recorded by 1590s.


satin (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French satin (14c.), perhaps from Arabic (atlas) zaytuni, literally (satin) from
Zaitun, a Chinese city, perhaps modern Quanzhou in Fukien province, southern China, a major port in
the Middle Ages, with a resident community of European traders. The form of the word perhaps
influenced in French by Latin seta silk. OED finds the Arabic connection etymologically untenable
and takes the French word straight from Latin. As an adjective from mid-15c.


shelter (n.)

1580s, structure affording protection, possibly an alteration of Middle English sheltron, sheldtrume
roof or wall formed by locked shields, from Old English scyldtruma, from scield shield (see shield
(n.)) + truma troop, related to Old English trum firm, strong (see trim).    If so, the original
notion is of a compact body of men protected by interlocking shields. OED finds this untenable and
proposed derivation from shield + -ture. Figurative sense is recorded from 1580s; meaning temporary
lodging for homeless poor is first recorded 1890 in Salvation Army jargon; sense of temporary home
for animals is from 1971. Related: Shelterless.


