unwieldy (adj.)

late 14c., lacking strength, powerless, from un- (1) not + obsolete wieldy, from Old English wielde
active, vigorous, from Proto-Germanic *walth- have power (see wield (v.)). Meaning moving
ungracefully is recorded from 1520s; in reference to weapons, difficult to handle, awkward by virtue
of size or shape it is attested from 1540s. Related: Unwieldiness.


cumbrous (adj.)

late 14c., cumbersome, troublesome, clumsy, unwieldy, from cumber + -ous.


hulk (v.)

to be clumsy, unwieldy, lazy, 1789, from hulk (n.). Related: Hulked; hulking.


cumbersome (adj.)

late 14c., from cumber (v.) + -some (1). Meaning unwieldy, hard to carry is from 1590s. Related:
Cumbersomely; cumbersomeness.


hulk (n.)

Old English hulc light, fast ship (but in Middle English a heavy, unwieldy one), probably from Old
Dutch hulke and Medieval Latin hulcus, perhaps ultimately from Greek holkas merchant ship, literally
ship that is towed, from helkein to pull (from PIE root *selk- to pull, draw). Meaning body of an
old, worn-out ship is first recorded 1670s. The Hulks (Great Expectations) were old ships used as
prisons. Sense of big, clumsy person is first recorded c.1400 (early 14c. as a surname: Stephen le
Hulke).


jumbo (adj.)

very large, unusually large for its type, 1882, a reference to Jumbo, name of the London Zoo's huge
elephant (acquired from France, said to have been captured as a baby in Abyssinia in 1861), sold
February 1882 to U.S. circus showman P.T. Barnum amid great excitement in America and great outcry
in England, both fanned by Barnum. The name is perhaps from slang jumbo clumsy, unwieldy fellow
(1823), which itself is possibly from a word for elephant in a West African language (compare Kongo
nzamba).    I tell you conscientiously that no idea of the immensity of the animal can be formed. It
is a fact that he is simply beyond comparison. The largest elephants I ever saw are mere dwarfs by
the side of Jumbo. [P.T. Barnum, interview, Philadelphia Press, April 22, 1882]    As a product
size, by 1886 (cigars). Jumbo jet attested by 1964.


clumsy (adj.)

1590s, acting as if benumbed, alteration of Middle English clumsid numb with cold (14c.), past
participle of clumsen to benumb, stiffen or paralyze with cold or fear, from a Scandinavian source
akin to Old Norse klumsa make speechless, palsy; prevent from speaking, intensive of kluma to make
motionless. For insertion of -s-, see flimsy.    Not in general use until 18c., with senses
manifesting awkwardness; so made as to be unwieldy. Related: Clumsily; clumsiness. Compare Swedish
dialectal klummsen benumbed with cold, Norwegian klumsad (past participle) speechless, palsied by a
spasm or by fear or witchery; German verklammen grow stiff or numb with cold. Also compare clumse
(n.) a stupid fellow.


