upright (adj.)

Old English upriht erect, face-upward; see up (adv.) + right (adj.1). Similar compounds are found in
other Germanic languages (Old Frisian upriucht, Middle Dutch oprecht, Old High German ufreht, German
aufrecht, Old Norse uprettr). Figurative sense of good, honest, adhering to rectitude is first
attested 1520s.    As an adverb, Old English uprihte. As a noun, 1560s in the sense a vertical
front; c.1700 as a vertical timber in framing; 1742 in the sense something standing erect. Meaning
an upright piano is from 1860.    THREE-PENNY UPRIGHT. A retailer of love, who, for the sum
mentioned, dispenses her favours standing against a wall. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]
<hr />   The bent-over rear-entry posture they are talking about, of course, is kubda, the three-
obol position at the bottom-end of a prostitute's price-range. [James N. Davidson, Courtesans and
Fishcakes: The Consuming Passions of Classical Athens, 1997]


erect (adj.)

late 14c., upright, not bending, from Latin erectus upright, elevated, lofty; eager, alert, aroused,
past participle of erigere raise or set up, from e- up + regere to direct, keep straight, guide (see
regal).


stanchion (n.)

early 14c., post, pillar, or beam used for support, from Old French estanchon prop, brace, support
(13c., Modern French &eacute;tan&ccedil;on), probably from estant upright, from present participle
of ester be upright, stand, from Latin stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


post (n.1)

a timber set upright, from Old English post pillar, doorpost, and Old French post post, upright
beam, both from Latin postis door, post, doorpost, perhaps from por- forth (see pro-) + stare to
stand (see stet). Similar compound in Sanskrit prstham back, roof, peak, Avestan parshti back, Greek
pastas porch in front of a house, colonnade, Middle High German virst ridepole, Lithuanian pirstas,
Old Church Slavonic pristu finger (PIE *por-st-i-).


just (adj.)

late 14c., righteous in the eyes of God; upright, equitable, impartial; justifiable, reasonable,
from Old French juste just, righteous; sincere (12c.), from Latin iustus upright, equitable, from
ius right, especially legal right, law, from Old Latin ious, perhaps literally sacred formula, a
word peculiar to Latin (not general Italic) that originated in the religious cults, from PIE root
*yewes- law (cognates: Avestan yaozda- make ritually pure; see jurist). The more mundane Latin law-
word lex covered specific laws as opposed to the body of laws. The noun meaning righteous person or
persons is from late 14c.


standard (n.1)

mid-12c., flag or other conspicuous object to serve as a rallying point for a military force, from
shortened form of Old French estandart military standard, banner. According to Barnhart and others,
this is probably from Frankish *standhard, literally stand fast or firm, a compound of unrecorded
Frankish words cognate stand (v.) and hard. So called because the flag was fixed to a pole or spear
and stuck in the ground to stand upright. The more common theory [OED, etc.] calls this folk-
etymology and connects the Old French word to estendre to stretch out, from Latin extendere (see
extend). Some senses (such as upright pole, mid-15c.) seem to be influenced by if not from stand
(v.). Standard-bearer in the figurative sense is from 1560s.


riser (n.)

late 14c., rebel, agent noun from rise (v.). Meaning one who rises (from bed, in a certain manner)
is mid-15c. Meaning upright part of a step is from 1771.


kickstand (n.)

metal support for holding a bicycle upright, 1936, from kick (v.) + stand (n.). So called for the
method of putting it in position.


good will

Old English godes willan virtuous, pious, upright, also state of wishing well to another. One-word
form goodwill (18c.) is used especially in commercial senses.


raise (v.)

c.1200, cause a rising of; lift upright, set upright; build, construct, from a Scandinavian source,
such as Old Norse reisa to raise, from Proto-Germanic *raizjan (cognates: Gothic ur-raisjan, Old
English r&aelig;ran to rear; see rear (v.)), causative of root *ris- to rise (see rise (v.)). At
first sharing many senses with native rear (v.).    Meaning make higher is from c.1300 in the
physical sense, as is that of restore to life. Of the voice, from late 14c. Meaning increase the
amount of is from c.1500; from 1530s of prices, etc. Meaning to bring up (a question, etc.) is from
1640s. Card-playing sense is from 1821. Meaning promote the growth of (plants, etc.) is from 1660s;
sense of foster, rear, bring up (of children) is from 1744. Meaning to elevate (the consciousness)
is from 1970. Related: Raised; raising.    Pickering (1816) has a long passage on the use of raise
and grow in reference to crops. He writes that in the U.S. raise is used of persons, in the sense
brought up, but it is never thus used in the Northern States. Bartlett [1848] adds that it is
applied in the Southern States to the breeding of negroes. It is sometimes heard at the North among
the illiterate; as 'I was raised in Connecticut,' meaning brought up there.


right (adj.1)

morally correct, Old English riht just, good, fair; proper, fitting; straight, not bent, direct,
erect, from Proto-Germanic *rekhtaz (cognates: Old Frisian riucht right, Old Saxon reht, Middle
Dutch and Dutch recht, Old High German reht, German recht, Old Norse rettr, Gothic raihts), from PIE
root *reg- move in a straight line, also to rule, to lead straight, to put right (see regal;
cognates: Greek orektos stretched out, upright; Latin rectus straight, right; Old Persian rasta-
straight, right, ar&#353;ta- rectitude; Old Irish recht law; Welsh rhaith, Breton reiz just,
righteous, wise).    Compare slang straight (adj.1) honest, morally upright, and Latin rectus right,
literally straight, Lithuanian teisus right, true, literally straight. Greek dikaios just (in the
moral and legal sense) is from dike custom. As an emphatic, meaning you are right, it is recorded
from 1580s; use as a question meaning am I not right? is from 1961. The sense in right whale is
justly entitled to the name. Right stuff best human ingredients is from 1848, popularized by Tom
Wolfe's 1979 book about the first astronauts. Right of way is attested from 1767. Right angle is
from late 14c.


standard (adj.)

1620s, serving as a standard, from standard (adj.). Earlier it meant upright (1530s). Standard-bred
bred up to some agreed-upon standard of excellence is from 1888.


standing (adj.)

late 14c., at rest, motionless, also permanent, not transient, present participle adjective from
stand (v.). Meaning having an erect position, upright is from 1570s; that of done while standing is
from 1630s. The sense in standing army (c.1600) is permanent. Standing ovation is from 1902.


stele (n.)

upright slab, usually inscribed, 1820, from Greek stele standing block, slab, especially one bearing
an inscription, such as a gravestone, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Related:
Stelar.


headstone (n.)

c.1400, cornerstone, from head (adj.) + stone (n.). Meaning upright stone at the head of a grave is
1775, from head (n.).


clothes-horse (n.)

also clothes horse, upright wooden frame for hanging clothes to dry, 1788, from clothes + horse
(n.). Figurative sense of person whose sole function seems to be to show off clothes is 1850.


histo-

medical word-forming element, from Greek histos warp, web, literally anything set upright, from
histasthai to stand, from PIE *sta- to stand (see stet). Taken by 19c. medical writers as the best
Greek root from which to form terminology for tissue.


integer (n.)

a whole number (opposed to fraction), 1570s, from Latin integer (adj.) whole, complete,
figuratively, untainted, upright, literally untouched, from in- not (see in- (1)) + root of tangere
to touch (see tangent (adj.)). The word was used earlier in English as an adjective meaning whole,
entire (c.1500).


stand-pipe (n.)

upright pipe, in various technical senses, 1810, from stand (v.) + pipe (n.).


aplomb (n.)

assurance, confidence, 1828, from French aplomb (16c.), literally perpendicularity, from phrase
&agrave; plomb poised upright, balanced, literally on the plumb line, from Latin plumbum (the metal)
lead (see plumb (n.)), of which the weight at the end of the line was made.


rectitude (n.)

early 15c., quality of being straight, from Middle French rectitude (14c.), from Late Latin
rectitudinem (nominative rectitudo) straightness, uprightness, from Latin rectus straight (see right
(adj.1)). Sense of upright in conduct or character is from 1530s.


sustentation (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French, Old French sustentacion, sostentacion sustaining of life, from Latin
sustentationem (nominative sustentatio) maintenance, noun of action from past participle stem of
sustentare hold upright, hold up; feed, nourish, support; hold out, endure, suffer, frequentative of
sustinere (see sustain).


gibbet (n.)

early 13c., gallows, from Old French gibet gallows; a bent stick, diminutive of gibe club, perhaps
from Frankish *gibb forked stick. The verb meaning to kill by hanging is from 1590s. Related:
Gibbeted; gibbeting. Originally synonymous with GALLOWS sb., but in later use signifying an upright
post with projecting arm from which the bodies of criminals were hung in chains or irons after
execution [OED].


rail (n.1)

horizontal bar passing from one post or support to another, c.1300, from Old French reille bolt,
bar, from Vulgar Latin *regla, from Latin regula straight stick, diminutive form related to regere
to straighten, guide (see regal). Used figuratively for thinness from 1872. To be off the rails in a
figurative sense is from 1848, an image from the railroads. In U.S. use, A piece of timber, cleft,
hewed, or sawed, inserted in upright posts for fencing [Webster, 1830].


candid (adj.)

1620s, white, from Latin candidum white; pure; sincere, honest, upright, from candere to shine, from
PIE root *kand- to glow, to shine (see candle). In English, metaphoric extension to frank first
recorded 1670s (compare French candide open, frank, ingenuous, sincere). Of photography, 1929.
Related: Candidly; candidness.


ingenuous (adj.)

1590s, noble in nature, from Latin ingenuus with the virtues of freeborn people, of noble character,
frank, upright, candid, originally native, freeborn, from in- in (see in- (2)) + gen-, root of
gignere beget, produce (see genus). Sense of artless, innocent is 1670s, via evolution from high-
minded to honorably open, straightforward, to innocently frank. Related: Ingenuously; ingenuousness.


menhir (n.)

upright monumental stone, 1834, literally long stone, from French menhir (19c.), from Breton men
stone + hir long, from PIE *se-ro-, from root *se- long, late (see soiree). Cognate with Welsh maen
hir, Cornish medn hir.


stability (n.)

mid-14c., firmness of resolve, mental equilibrium (of persons), from Old French stablete, establete
firmness, solidity, stability; durability, constancy (Modern French stabilit&#233;), from Latin
stabilitatem (nominative stabilitas) a standing fast, firmness, figuratively security,
steadfastness, from stabilis steadfast, firm (see stable (adj.)). In physical sense, state of being
difficult to overthrow, power of remaining upright, it is recorded from early 15c. Meaning
continuance in the same state is from 1540s.


sustain (v.)

c.1300, give support to, from stem of Old French sostenir hold up, bear; suffer, endure (13c.), from
Latin sustinere hold up, hold upright; furnish with means of support; bear, undergo, endure, from
sub up from below (see sub-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning continue, keep up (an action,
etc.) is from early 14c. Sense of endure without failing or yielding is from c.1400. Related:
Sustained; sustaining.


pitch (v.1)

c.1200, to thrust in, fasten, settle, probably from an unrecorded Old English *piccean, related to
prick (v.). The original past tense was pight. Sense of set upright, as in pitch a tent (late 13c.),
is from notion of driving in the pegs. Meaning to incline forward and downward is from 1510s.
Meaning throw (a ball) evolved late 14c. from that of hit the mark. Musical sense is from 1670s. Of
ships, to plunge in the waves, 1620s. To pitch in work vigorously is from 1847, perhaps from farm
labor. Related: Pitched; pitching.


spinet (n.)

1660s, spinette, small harpsichord, from Middle French espinette (16c., Modern French
&#233;pinette), from Italian spinetta, said by Scaliger to be a diminutive of spina thorn, spine,
from Latin spina thorn (see spine), so called because the strings were plucked with thorn-like
quills [Barnhart]. The other theory (favored by Klein and assigned greater probability by OED) dates
to early 17c. and claims the word is from the name of the Venetian inventor, Giovanni Spinetti (fl.
c.1503). As small, upright piano from 1936.


ortho-

before vowels orth-, word-forming element meaning straight, upright, rectangular, regular; true,
correct, proper, now mostly in scientific and technical compounds, from Greek ortho-, stem of orthos
straight, true, correct, regular, from PIE *eredh- high (cognates: Sanskrit urdhvah high, lofty,
steep, Latin arduus high, steep, Old Irish ard high).


stamen (n.)

pollen-bearing organ of a flower, 1660s, from Modern Latin (1625, Spigelus), from Latin stamen
stamen (Pliny), literally foundation in weaving, thread of the warp in the upright loom (related to
stare to stand), from PIE *sta-men- (cognates: Greek stemon warp, also used by Hesychius for some
part of a plant, Gothic stoma, Sanskrit sthaman place, also strength), from root *sta- to stand (see
stet). The usual English plural is stamens because of the special use of the classical plural,
stamina.


attic (n.)

top story under the roof of a house, 1855, shortened from attic storey (1724). The term Attic order
in classical architecture meant a small, square decorative column of the type often used in a low
story above a building's main facade, a feature associated with the region around Athens (see
Attic). The word then was applied by architects to a low decorative facade above the main story of a
building (1690s in English) to convey a classical heritage where none exists, and it came to mean
the space enclosed by such a structure. The modern use is via French attique. An attic is upright, a
garret is in a sloping roof [Weekley].


bolt (n.)

Old English bolt short, stout arrow with a heavy head; also crossbow for throwing bolts, from Proto-
Germanic *bultas (cognates: Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps from
PIE root *bheld- to knock, strike (cognates: Lithuanian beldu I knock, baldas pole for striking).
Applied since Middle English to other short metal rods (especially those with knobbed ends). From
the notion of an arrow's flight comes the lightning bolt (1530s). A bolt of canvas (c.1400) was so
called for its shape. Adverbial phrase bolt upright is from late 14c.


justice (n.)

mid-12c., the exercise of authority in vindication of right by assigning reward or punishment; also
quality of being fair and just, from Old French justice justice, legal rights, jurisdiction (11c.),
from Latin iustitia righteousness, equity, from iustus upright, just (see just (adj.)). The Old
French word had widespread senses, including uprightness, equity, vindication of right, court of
justice, judge. The word began to be used in English c.1200 as a title for a judicial officer.
Meaning right order, equity is late 14c. Justice of the peace first attested early 14c. In the
Mercian hymns, Latin iustitia is glossed by Old English rehtwisnisse. To do justice to (someone or
something) render fully and fairly showing due appreciation is from 1670s.


dolmen (n.)

1859, from French dolmin applied 1796 by French general and antiquarian Th&eacute;ophile Malo Corret
de La Tour d'Auvergne (1743-1800), perhaps from Cornish tolmen enormous stone slab set up on
supporting points, such that a man may walk under it, literally hole of stone, from Celtic men
stone.    Some suggest the first element may be Breton taol table, a loan-word from Latin tabula
board, plank, but the Breton form of this compound would be taolvean. There is reason to think that
this [tolmen] is the word inexactly reproduced by Latour d'Auvergne as dolmin, and misapplied by him
and succeeding French archaeologists to the cromlech [OED]. See cromlech, which is properly an
upright flat stone, often arranged as one of a circle.


prove (v.)

late 12c., pruven, proven to try, test; evaluate; demonstrate, from Old French prover, pruver show;
convince; put to the test (11c., Modern French prouver), from Latin probare to make good; esteem,
represent as good; make credible, show, demonstrate; test, inspect; judge by trial (source also of
Spanish probar, Italian probare), from probus worthy, good, upright, virtuous, from PIE *pro-bhwo-
being in front, from *pro-, extended form of root *per- (1) forward, through (see per), + root *bhu-
to be (cognates: Latin fui I have been, futurus about to be; Old English beon to be; see be).
Related: Proved; proven; proving.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


Roman (n.)

Old English, from Latin Romanus of Rome, Roman, from Roma Rome (see Rome). The adjective is c.1300,
from Old French Romain. The Old English adjective was romanisc, which yielded Middle English
Romanisshe.    As a type of numeral (usually contrasted to Arabic) it is attested from 1728; as a
type of lettering (based on the upright style typical of Roman inscriptions, contrasted to Gothic,
or black letter, and italic) it is recorded from 1510s. Roman nose is from 1620s. Roman candle as a
type of fireworks is recorded from 1834. Roman Catholic is attested from c.1600, a conciliatory
formation from the time of the Spanish Match, replacing Romanist, Romish which by that time had the
taint of insult in Protestant England.


stay (v.1)

mid-15c., cease going forward, come to a halt, also (transitive) detain, hold back, from Old French
estai-, stem of estare to stay or stand, from Latin stare to stand, stand still, remain standing; be
upright, be erect; stand firm, stand in battle; abide; be unmovable; be motionless; remain, tarry,
linger; take a side, (source also of Italian stare, Spanish estar to stand, to be), from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of remain is first recorded 1570s; that of reside as a guest for a
short period is from 1550s. Related: Stayed; staying.    Of things, remain in place, 1590s. Stay put
is first recorded 1843, American English. To stay put is to keep still, remain in order. A vulgar
expression [Bartlett]. Phrase stay the course is originally (1885) in reference to horses holding
out till the end of a race. Stay-stomach was (1800) a snack.


screen (n.)

mid-14c., upright piece of furniture providing protection from heat of a fire, drafts, etc.,
probably from a shortened (Anglo-French? compare Anglo-Latin screna) variant of Old North French
escren, Old French escran fire-screen (early 14c.), perhaps from Middle Dutch scherm screen, cover,
shield, or Frankish *skrank barrier, from Proto-Germanic *skerm- (cognates: Old High German skirm,
skerm protection, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    Meaning net-wire frame used in
windows and doors is recorded from 1859. Meaning flat vertical surface for reception of projected
images is from 1810, originally in reference to magic lantern shows; later of movies. Transferred
sense of cinema world collectively is attested from 1914; hence screen test (1918), etc. Screen
saver first attested 1990. Screen printing recorded from 1918.


steer (v.)

guide the course of a vehicle, originally by a rudder or something like it, Old English steran
(Mercian), stieran (West Saxon) steer, guide, direct; govern, rule; restrain, correct, punish, from
Proto-Germanic *steurjan (cognates: Old Norse styra, Old Frisian stiora, Dutch sturen, Old High
German stiuren, German steuern to steer, Gothic stiurjan to establish, assert), related to *steuro a
rudder, a steering, from PIE *steu-ro- (cognates: Greek stauros stake, pole), extended form of root
*sta- to stand (see stet).    The notion is of a stiff, upright pillar or post used in steering, or
else perhaps establish, hence direct, steer. Intransitive sense also was in Old English. To steer
clear of in the figurative sense of to avoid completely is recorded from 1723. Related: Steered;
steering.


stet

direction to printer to disregard correction made to text, 1755, from Latin stet let it stand, third
person singular present subjunctive of stare to stand, stand upright, be stiff, from PIE root *sta-
to stand, set down, make or be firm, with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing
(cognates: Sanskrit tisthati stands; Avestan histaiti to stand; Persian -stan country, literally
where one stands; Greek histemi put, place, cause to stand; weigh, stasis a standing still, statos
placed, stater a weight, coin, stylos pillar; Latin sistere stand still, stop, make stand, place,
produce in court, status manner, position, condition, attitude, stare to stand, statio station,
post; Lithuanian stojus place myself, statau place; Old Church Slavonic staja place myself, stanu
position; Gothic standan, Old English standan to stand, stede place, steall place where cattle are
kept; Old Norse ste&eth;i anvil, stallr pedestal for idols, altar; German Stall a stable; Old Irish
sessam the act of standing).


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


back (n.)

Old English b&aelig;c back, from Proto-Germanic *bakam (cognates: Old Saxon and Middle Dutch bak,
Old Frisian bek), with no known connections outside Germanic. In other modern Germanic languages the
cognates mostly have been ousted in this sense ib words akin to Modern English ridge (cognates:
Danish ryg, German R&uuml;cken). Many Indo-European languages show signs of once having
distinguished the horizontal back of an animal (or a mountain range) from the upright back of a
human. In other cases, a modern word for back may come from a word related to spine (Italian
schiena, Russian spina) or shoulder, shoulder blade (Spanish espalda, Polish plecy).    To turn
(one's) back on (someone or something) ignore is from early 14c. Behind (someone's) back
clandestinely is from late 14c. To know (something) like the back of one's hand, implying
familiarity, is first attested 1893. The first attested use of the phrase is from a dismissive
speech made to a character in Robert Louis Stevenson's Catriona:    If I durst speak to herself, you
may be certain I would never dream of trusting it to you; because I know you like the back of my
hand, and all your blustering talk is that much wind to me.    The story, a sequel to Kidnapped, has
a Scottish setting and context, and the back of my hand to you was noted in the late 19th century as
a Scottish expression meaning I will have nothing to do with you [see Longmuir's edition of
Jamieson's Scottish dictionary]. In English generally, the back of (one's) hand has been used to
imply contempt and rejection since at least 1300. Perhaps the connection of a menacing dismissal is
what made Stevenson choose that particular anatomical reference.


