uproarious (adj.)

1791, from uproar + -ous. Related: Uproariously.


uproar (n.)

1520s, outbreak of disorder, revolt, commotion, used by Tindale and later Coverdale as a loan-
translation of German Aufruhr or Dutch oproer tumult, riot, literally a stirring up, in German and
Dutch bibles (as in Acts xxi:38). From German auf (Middle Dutch op) up (see up (adv.)) + ruhr
(Middle Dutch roer) a stirring, motion, related to Old English hreran to move, stir, shake (see rare
(adj.2)). Meaning noisy shouting is first recorded 1540s, probably by mistaken association with
unrelated roar.


hurdy-gurdy

1749, perhaps imitative of its sound and influenced by c.1500 hirdy-girdy uproar, confusion.


hullabaloo (n.)

1762, hollo-ballo uproar, chiefly in northern England and Scottish, perhaps a rhyming reduplication
of hollo (see hello).


tumult (n.)

late 14c., from Old French tumult (12c.), from Latin tumultus commotion, bustle, uproar, disorder,
disturbance, related to tumere to be excited, swell (see tumid).


riproaring (adj.)

1834, altered from riproarious (1821), from rip (v.) tear apart + uproarious; see uproar.


rough-house (n.)

1887, uproar, disturbance, from rough (adj.) + house (n.). The verb is first attested 1896. Related:
Rough-housing.


manhandle (v.)

mid-15c., wield a tool, also, late 15c., to attack (an enemy), from man (n.) + handle (v.). Nautical
meaning to move by force of men (without levers or tackle) is attested from 1834, and is the source
of the slang meaning to handle roughly (1865).    [T]he two Canalers rushed into the uproar, and
sought to drag their man out of it toward the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined with them in
this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of harm's way, the valiant captain
danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious
scoundrel, and smoke him along to the quarter-deck. [Melville, The Town-Ho's Story, Harper's
magazine, October 1851]


stampede (n.)

1844 (earlier stampedo, 1839), A general scamper of animals on the Western prairies, generally
caused by a fright [Bartlett] from Mexican Spanish estampida, from Spanish, an uproar, from estamper
to stamp, press, pound, from Proven&ccedil;al estampier to stamp, from the same Germanic root that
yielded English stamp (v.). The political sense is first recorded 1846 (in reference to the U.S.
Democratic Party convention of 1844). As the name of an annual exhibition of cowboy skills in
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, it is attested from 1912.


fracas (n.)

1727, from French fracas (15c.), from Italian fracasso uproar, crash, back-formation from fracassare
to smash, crash, break in pieces, from fra-, a shortening of Latin infra below + Italian cassare to
break, from Latin quassare to shake (see quash).


stour (n.)

c.1300, tumult, armed conflict, struggle with adversity or pain, from Anglo-French estur, Old French
estour a tumult, conflict, assault, shock, battle, from Proto-Germanic *sturmoz storm (cognates: Old
High German sturm storm; battle; see storm (n.)). Became obsolete, revived by Spenser and his
followers in various senses; also surviving as a Scottish and Northern English word meaning a
(driving) storm or uproar, commotion. Italian stormo also is from Germanic.


pandemonium (n.)

1667, Pand&aelig;monium, in Paradise Lost the name of the palace built in the middle of Hell, the
high capital of Satan and all his peers, coined by John Milton (1608-1674) from Greek pan- all (see
pan-) + Late Latin daemonium evil spirit, from Greek daimonion inferior divine power, from daimon
lesser god (see demon).    Transferred sense place of uproar is from 1779; that of wild, lawless
confusion is from 1865. Related: Pandemoniac; pandemoniacal; pandemonian; pandemonic.


roof (n.)

Old English hrof roof, ceiling, top, summit; heaven, sky, also figuratively, highest point of
something, from Proto-Germanic *khrofam (cognates: Old Frisian rhoof roof, Middle Dutch roof, rouf
cover, roof, Dutch roef deckhouse, cabin, coffin-lid, Middle High German rof penthouse, Old Norse
hrof boat shed).    No apparent connections outside Germanic. English alone has retained the word in
a general sense, for which the other languages use forms corresponding to OE. &thorn;&aelig;c thatch
[OED]. Roof of the mouth is from late Old English. Raise the roof create an uproar is attested from
1860, originally in U.S. Southern dialect.


riot (n.)

c.1200, debauchery, extravagance, wanton living, from Old French riote (12c.) dispute, quarrel,
(tedious) talk, chattering, argument, domestic strife, also a euphemism for sexual intercourse, of
uncertain origin. Compare Medieval Latin riota quarrel, dispute, uproar, riot. Perhaps from Latin
rugire to roar.  Meaning public disturbance is first recorded late 14c. Meaning something
spectacularly successful first recorded 1909 in theater slang.   Run riot is first recorded 1520s, a
metaphoric extension from Middle English meaning in reference to hounds following the wrong scent.
The Riot Act, part of which must be read to a mob before active measures can be taken, was passed
1714 (1 Geo. I, st.2, c.5). Riot girl and alternative form riot grrl first recorded 1992.


noise (n.)

early 13c., loud outcry, clamor, shouting, from Old French noise din, disturbance, uproar, brawl
(11c., in modern French only in phrase chercher noise to pick a quarrel), also rumor, report, news,
apparently from Latin nausea disgust, annoyance, discomfort, literally seasickness (see nausea).
Another theory traces the Old French word to Latin noxia hurting, injury, damage. OED considers that
the sense of the word is against both suggestions, but nausea could have developed a sense in Vulgar
Latin of unpleasant situation, noise, quarrel (compare Old Proven&ccedil;al nauza noise, quarrel).
Meaning loud or unpleasant sound is from c.1300. Replaced native gedyn (see din).


circus (n.)

late 14c., in reference to ancient Rome, from Latin circus ring, circular line, which was applied by
Romans to circular arenas for performances and contests and oval courses for racing (especially the
Circus Maximus), from or cognate with Greek kirkos a circle, a ring, from PIE *kirk- from root
*(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)).    In reference to modern large arenas for performances
from 1791; sense then extended to the performing company, hence traveling show (originally traveling
circus, 1838). Extended in World War I to squadrons of military aircraft. Meaning lively uproar,
chaotic hubbub is from 1869. Sense in Picadilly Circus and other place names is from early 18c.
sense buildings arranged in a ring, also circular road. The adjective form is circensian.


