urbane (adj.)

1530s, of or relating to cities or towns, from Middle French urbain (14c.) and directly from Latin
urbanus belonging to a city, also citified, elegant (see urban). The meaning having the manners of
townspeople, courteous, refined is from 1620s, from a secondary sense in classical Latin. Urbanity
in this sense is recorded from 1530s. For sense connection and differentiation of form, compare
human/humane; german/germane.


germane (adj.)

mid-14c., having the same parents, derived from german (adj.); compare human/humane, urban/urbane.
Main modern sense of closely connected, relevant (c.1600) derives from use in Hamlet Act V, Scene
ii: The phrase would bee more Germaine to the matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides, which
is a figurative use of the word in the now-obsolete sense of closely related, akin (late 15c.) in
reference to things, not persons.


humane (adj.)

mid-15c., variant of human (compare german/germane, urban/urbane), used interchangeably with it
until early 18c., by which time it had become a distinct word with sense of having qualities
befitting human beings. But inhuman still can be the opposite of humane. The Royal Humane Society
(founded 1774) was originally to rescue drowning persons. Such societies had turned to animal care
by late 19c.


urban (adj.)

characteristic of city life, pertaining to cities or towns, 1610s (but rare before 1830s), from
Latin urbanus of or pertaining to a city or city life; in Rome, also in city fashion, polished,
refined, cultivated, courteous, but also sometimes witty, facetious, bold, impudent; as a noun, city
dweller, from urbs (genitive urbis) city, walled town, of unknown origin.    The word gradually
emerged in this sense as urbane became restricted to manners and styles of expression. In late 20c.
American English gradually acquiring a suggestion of African-American. Urban renewal, euphemistic
for slum clearance, is attested from 1955, American English. Urban sprawl recorded by 1958. Urban
legend attested by 1980.


