urchin (n.)

c.1300, yrichon hedgehog, from Old North French *irechon (cognates: Picard irechon, Walloon ireson,
Hainaut hirchon), from Old French herichun hedgehog (Modern French h&eacute;risson), formed with
diminutive suffix -on + Vulgar Latin *hericionem, from Latin ericius hedgehog, enlarged form of er,
originally *her, from PIE root *ghers- to bristle (cognates: Greek kheros hedgehog; see horror).
Still used for hedgehog in non-standard speech in Cumbria, Yorkshire, Shropshire. Applied throughout
16c. to people whose appearance or behavior suggested hedgehogs, from hunchbacks (1520s) to goblins
(1580s) to bad girls (1530s); meaning poorly or raggedly clothed youngster emerged 1550s, but was
not in frequent use until after c.1780. Sea urchin is recorded from 1590s (a 19c. Newfoundland name
for them was whore's eggs); Johnson describes it as a kind of crabfish that has prickles instead of
feet.


guttersnipe (n.)

also gutter-snipe, 1857, from gutter (n.) + snipe (n.); originally Wall Street slang for
streetcorner broker, attested later (1869) as street urchin, also one who gathers rags and paper
from gutters. As a name for the common snipe, it dates from 1874 but is perhaps earlier.


echinoderm (n.)

1835, from Modern Latin Echinodermata, name of the phylum that includes starfish and sea urchins,
from Greek ekhinos sea urchin, originally porcupine, hedgehog (see echidna) + derma (genitive
dermatos) skin (see derma); so called from its spiky shell.


gamin (n.)

street urchin, 1837, from French gamin (18c.), perhaps from Berrichon dialect gamer to steal.
Introduced in English in translations of Hugo.   Un groupe d'enfants, de ces petits sauvages vanu-
pieds qui ont de tout temps battu le pav&eacute; de Paris sous le nom &eacute;ternel de gamins, et
qui, lorsque nous &eacute;tions enfants aussi, nous ont jet&eacute; des pierres &agrave; tous, le
soir, au sortir de classe, parce que nos pantalons n'&eacute;taient pas d&eacute;chir&eacute;s; etc.
[Hugo, Notre-Dame de Paris]


echidna (n.)

Australian egg-laying hedgehog-like mammal, 1847, usually explained as from Greek ekhidna snake,
viper, from ekhis snake, from PIE *angwhi- snake, eel (cognates: Norwegian igle, Old High German
egala, German Egel leech, Latin anguis serpent, snake).    But this sense is difficult to reconcile
with this animal (unless it is a reference to the ant-eating tongue), and the name seems more
properly to belong to Latin echinus, Greek ekhinos sea-urchin, originally hedgehog (in Greek also
sharp points), which Watkins explains as snake-eater, from ekhis snake.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


sand (n.)

Old English sand, from Proto-Germanic *sandam (cognates: Old Norse sandr, Old Frisian sond, Middle
Dutch sant, Dutch zand, German Sand), from PIE *bhs-amadho- (cognates: Greek psammos sand; Latin
sabulum coarse sand, source of Italian sabbia, French sable), suffixed form of root *bhes- to rub.
Historically, the line between sand and gravel cannot be distinctly drawn. Used figuratively in Old
English in reference to innumerability and instability. General Germanic, but not attested in
Gothic, which used in this sense malma, related to Old High German melm dust, the first element of
the Swedish city name Malm&#246; (the second element meaning island), and to Latin molere to grind.
Metaphoric for innumerability since Old English. Sand dollar, type of flat sea-urchin, so called
from 1884, so called for its shape; sand dune attested from 1830.


sea (n.)

Old English s&aelig; sheet of water, sea, lake, pool, from Proto-Germanic *saiwaz (cognates: Old
Saxon seo, Old Frisian se, Middle Dutch see, Swedish sj&#246;), of unknown origin, outside
connections wholly doubtful [Buck]. Meaning large quantity (of anything) is from c.1200.  Meaning
dark area of the moon's surface is attested from 1660s (see mare (n.2)).    Germanic languages also
use the general Indo-European word (represented by English mere (n.)), but have no firm distinction
between sea and lake, either by size, by inland or open, or by salt vs. fresh. This may reflect the
Baltic geography where the languages are thought to have originated. The two words are used more or
less interchangeably in Germanic, and exist in opposite senses (such as Gothic saiws lake, marei
sea; but Dutch zee sea, meer lake). Compare also Old Norse s&aelig;r sea, but Danish s&oslash;,
usually lake but sea in phrases. German See is sea (fem.) or lake (masc.). The single Old English
word s&aelig; glosses Latin mare, aequor, pontus, pelagus, and marmor.    Phrase sea change
transformation is attested from 1610, first in Shakespeare (The Tempest, I.ii). Sea anemone is from
1742; sea legs is from 1712; sea level from 1806; sea urchin from 1590s. At sea in the figurative
sense of perplexed is attested from 1768, from literal sense of out of sight of land (c.1300).


