urge (n.)

1610s, act of urging, from urge (v.). Marked as rare in Century Dictionary (1902); in frequent use
from c.1910 [OED].


urgent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French urgent pressing, impelling (14c.), from Latin urgentem (nominative
urgens), present participle of urgere to press hard, urge (see urge (v.)). Related: Urgently.


urge (v.)

1550s, from Latin urgere to press hard, push forward, force, drive, compel, stimulate, from PIE root
*wreg- to push, shove, drive (cognates: Lithuanian verziu tie, fasten, squeeze, vargas need,
distress, vergas slave; Old Church Slavonic vragu enemy; Gothic wrikan persecute, Old English wrecan
drive, hunt, pursue). Related: Urged; urging.


admonish (v.)

mid-14c., amonesten remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning, from Old French amonester (12c.) urge,
encourage, warn, from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere bring to mind, remind, suggest;
also warn, advise, urge, from ad- to (see ad-) + monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)).    The -d-
was restored on Latin model. The ending was influenced by words in -ish (such as astonish, abolish).
Related: Admonished; admonishing.


instant (n.)

late 14c., infinitely short space of time, from Old French instant (adj.) assiduous, at hand, from
Medieval Latin instantem (nominative instans), in classical Latin present, pressing, urgent,
literally standing near, present participle of instare to urge, to stand near, be present (to urge
one's case), from in- in (see in- (2)) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Elliptical use of the French adjective as a noun.


hortatory (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French hortatoire and directly from Late Latin hortatorius encouraging, cheering,
from hortatus, past participle of hortari exhort, encourage, urge, incite, instigate, intensive of
horiri urge, incite, encourage, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (cognates: Old English
giernan to strive, desire, yearn; Gothic gairnei desire; Greek khresthai to lack, want; use, make
use of, kharis grace, favor, khairein to rejoice, delight in; Sanskrit haryati finds pleasure,
likes, harsate is aroused; Avestan zara effort, aim; Russian zhariti awake desire, charm).


sh (interj.)

exclamation used to urge or request silence, 1847. The gesture of putting a finger to the lips to
express silence is attested from Roman times. As a transitive verb from 1887; intransitive from
1925.


devil&#039;s advocate (n.)

1760, translating Latin advocatus diaboli, one whose job it is to urge against the canonization of a
candidate for sainthood. [F]ar from being the whitewasher of the wicked, the [devil's advocate] is
the blackener of the good. [Fowler]


seven-year itch (n.)

1899, American English, some sort of skin condition (sometimes identified with poison ivy infection)
that either lasts seven years or returns every seven years. Jocular use for urge to stray from
marital fidelity is attested from 1952, as the title of the Broadway play (made into a film, 1955)
by George Axelrod (1922-2003), in which the lead male character reads an article describing the high
number of men have extra-marital affairs after seven years of marriage.


stimulant (adj.)

1772, from French stimulant or directly from Latin stimulantem (nominative stimulans), present
participle of stimulare to prick, urge, stimulate (see stimulation). As a noun from 1794.


instigate (v.)

1540s, back-formation from instigation or else from Latin instigatus, past participle of instigare
to urge on, incite (see instigation). Related: Instigated; instigates; instigating.


incite (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French enciter (14c.), from Latin incitare to put into rapid motion,
figuratively rouse, urge, encourage, stimulate, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + citare
move, excite (see cite). Related: Incited; inciting.


stimulation (n.)

1520s, act of pricking or stirring to action, from Latin stimulationem (nominative stimulatio) an
incitement, noun of action from past participle stem of stimulare prick, goad, urge, from stimulus
spur, goad (see stimulus).


dissuade (v.)

1510s, from Middle French dissuader and directly from Latin dissuadere to advise against, oppose by
argument, from dis- off, against (see dis-) + suadere to urge (see suasion). Related: Dissuaded;
dissuading.


exhortation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French exhortacion and directly from Latin exhortationem (nominative exhortatio)
an exhortation, encouragement, noun of action from past participle stem of exhortari, from ex-
thoroughly (see ex-) + hortari encourage, urge (see hortatory).


citation (n.)

c.1300, summons, written notice to appear, from Old French citation or directly from Latin
citationem (nominative citatio) a command, noun of action from past participle stem of citare to
summon, urge, call; put in sudden motion, call forward; rouse, excite (see cite). Meaning passage
cited, quotation is from 1540s. From 1918 as a mention in an official dispatch.


edge (v.)

late 13c., to give an edge to (implied in past participle egged), from edge (n.). Meaning to move
edgeways (with the edge toward the spectator), advance slowly is from 1620s, originally nautical.
Meaning to defeat by a narrow margin is from 1953. The meaning urge on, incite (16c.) often must be
a mistake for egg (v.). Related: Edged; edging.


recommend (v.)

late 14c., praise, present as worthy, from Medieval Latin recommendare, from Latin re-, here
probably an intensive prefix, or else from a sense now obscure (see re-), + commendare commit to
one's care, commend (see commend). Meaning advise as to action, urge (that something be done) is
from 1746. Related: Recommended; recommending.


impel (v.)

early 15c., from Latin impellere to push, strike against, drive forward, urge on, from assimilated
form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related:
Impelled; impelling.


adage (n.)

brief, familiar proverb, 1540s, Middle French adage, from Latin adagium adage, proverb, apparently
from adagio, from ad- to (see ad-) + *agi-, root of aio I say, from PIE *ag- to speak. But Tucker
thinks the second element is rather ago set in motion, drive, urge.


hormone (n.)

1905, from Greek hormon that which sets in motion, present participle of horman impel, urge on, from
horme onset, impulse, from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- to move, set in motion. Used by Hippocrates
to denote a vital principle; modern meaning coined by English physiologist Ernest Henry Starling
(1866-1927). Jung used horme (1915) in reference to hypothetical mental energy that drives
unconscious activities and instincts. Related: Hormones.


menace (v.)

c.1300, from Old French menacer threaten, urge (11c.), Anglo-French manasser, from Vulgar Latin
*minaciare to threaten, from minacia (see menace (n.)). Related: Menaced; menacing.


instigation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French instigation and directly from Latin instigationem (nominative
instigatio), noun of action from past participle stem of instigare urge on, incite, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + *stigare, a root meaning to prick, from PIE root *steig- to prick, stick, pierce (see
stick (v.)).


suasion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French suasion (14c.) and directly from Latin suasionem (nominative suasio) a
recommending, advocacy, support, noun of action from past participle stem of suadere to urge,
incite, promote, advise, persuade, literally recommend as good (related to suavis sweet), from PIE
*swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). Survives chiefly in phrase moral suasion (1640s). Latin
Suada was the goddess of persuasion.


persuasion (n.)

late 14c., action of inducing (someone) to believe (something); argument to persuade, inducement,
from Old French persuasion (14c.) and directly from Latin persuasionem (nominative persuasio) a
convincing, persuading, noun of action from past participle stem of persuadere persuade, convince,
from per- thoroughly, strongly (see per) + suadere to urge, persuade, from PIE *swad- sweet,
pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). Meaning religious belief, creed is from 1620s.


Eros (n.)

god of love, late 14c., from Greek eros (plural erates), literally love, related to eran to love,
erasthai to love, desire, of uncertain origin.    Freudian sense of urge to self-preservation and
sexual pleasure is from 1922. Ancient Greek distinguished four ways of love: erao to be in love
with, to desire passionately or sexually; phileo have affection for; agapao have regard for, be
contented with; and stergo, used especially of the love of parents and children or a ruler and his
subjects.


stir (v.)

Old English styrian to stir, move; rouse, agitate, incite, urge (transitive and intransitive), from
Proto-Germanic *sturjan (cognates: Middle Dutch stoeren, Dutch storen to disturb, Old High German
storan to scatter, destroy, German st&ouml;ren to disturb), from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn, whirl
(see storm (n.)). Related: Stirred; stirring. Stir-fry (v.) is attested from 1959.


press (v.1)

push against, early 14c., to clasp, embrace; mid-14c. to squeeze out; also to cluster, gather in a
crowd;  late 14c., to press against, exert pressure, also assault, assail; also forge ahead, push
one's way, move forward, from Old French presser squeeze, press upon; torture (13c.), from Latin
pressare to press, frequentative formation from pressus, past participle of premere to press, hold
fast, cover, crowd, compress, from PIE *per- (4) to strike. Related: Pressed; pressing. Figurative
sense is from late 14c. Meaning to urge, argue for is from 1590s.


rack (n.3)

clouds driven before the wind, c.1300, also rush of wind, collision, crash, originally a northern
word, possibly from Old English racu cloud (or an unrecorded Scandinavian cognate of it), reinforced
by Old Norse rek wreckage, jetsam, or by influence of Old English wr&aelig;c something driven; from
Proto-Germanic *wrakaz, from PIE root *wreg- to push, shove, drive (see urge (v.)). Often confused
with wrack (n.), especially in phrase rack and ruin (1590s). The distinction is that rack is driven
clouds; wrack is seaweed cast up on shore.


cite (v.)

mid-15c., to summon, from Old French citer to summon (14c.), from Latin citare to summon, urge,
call; put in sudden motion, call forward; rouse, excite, frequentative of ciere to move, set in
motion, stir, rouse, call, invite from PIE root *keie- to set in motion, to move to and fro
(cognates: Sanskrit cyavate stirs himself, goes; Greek kinein to move, set in motion; change, stir
up, kinymai move myself; Gothic haitan call, be called; Old English hatan command, call). Sense of
calling forth a passage of writing is first attested 1530s. Related: Cited; citing.


wreak (v.)

Old English wrecan avenge, originally to drive, drive out, punish (class V strong verb; past tense
wr&aelig;c, past participle wrecen), from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (cognates: Old Saxon wrekan, Old
Norse reka, Old Frisian wreka, Middle Dutch wreken to drive, push, compel, pursue, throw, Old High
German rehhan, German r&auml;chen to avenge, Gothic wrikan to persecute), from PIE root *wreg- to
push, shove, drive, track down (see urge (v.)). Meaning inflict or take vengeance, with on, is
recorded from late 15c.; that of inflict or cause (damage or destruction) is attested from 1817.
Compare wrack (v.). Related: Wreaked; wreaking.


philosophy (n.)

c.1300, knowledge, body of knowledge, from Old French filosofie philosophy, knowledge (12c., Modern
French philosophie) and directly from Latin philosophia and from Greek philosophia love of
knowledge, pursuit of wisdom; systematic investigation, from philo- loving (see philo-) + sophia
knowledge, wisdom, from sophis wise, learned; of unknown origin.Nec quicquam aliud est philosophia,
si interpretari velis, praeter studium sapientiae; sapientia autem est rerum divinarum et humanarum
causarumque quibus eae res continentur scientia. [Cicero, De Officiis]   <hr />   [Philosophical
problems] are, of course, not empirical problems; but they are solved through an insight into the
workings of our language, and that in such a way that these workings are recognized -- despite an
urge to misunderstand them. The problems are solved, not through the contribution of new knowledge,
rather through the arrangement of things long familiar. Philosophy is a struggle against the
bewitchment (Verhexung) of our understanding by the resources of our language. [Ludwig Wittgenstein,
Philosophical Investigations, 1953]  Meaning system a person forms for conduct of life is attested
from 1771.


enemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French enemi (12c.), earlier inimi (9c.) enemy, adversary, foe, demon, the
Devil, from Latin inimicus hostile, unfriendly; an enemy (source of Italian nemico, Catalan enamic,
Spanish enemigo, Portuguese inimigo), from in- not (see in- (1)) + amicus friend related to amare to
love (see Amy).    Most words for personal enemy cover also enemy in war, but certain languages have
special terms for the latter, such as Greek polemioi (distinct from ekhthroi), Latin hostis,
originally stranger (distinct from inimicus), Russian neprijatel' (distinct from vrag).    Russian
vrag (Old Church Slavonic vragu) is cognate with Lithuanian vargas misery (see urge (v.)), and
probably is related to Proto-Germanic *wargoz, source of Old Norse vargr outlaw, hence wolf;
Icelandic vargur fox, Old English wearg criminal, felon; which likely were the inspirations for
J.R.R. Tolkien's warg a kind of large ferocious wolf in The Hobbit (1937) and Lord of the Rings.
Related: Enemies.


act (n.)

late 14c., a thing done, from Old French acte (official) document, and directly from Latin actus a
doing, a driving, impulse; a part in a play, act, and actum a thing done, originally a legal term,
both from agere to do, set in motion, drive, urge, chase, stir up, from PIE root *ag- to drive, draw
out or forth, move (cognates: Greek agein to lead, guide, drive, carry off, agon assembly, contest
in the games, agogos leader; Sanskrit ajati drives, ajirah moving, active; Old Norse aka to drive;
Middle Irish ag battle).    Theatrical (part of a play, 1510s) and legislative (early 15c.) senses
of the word also were in Latin. Meaning display of exaggerated behavior is from 1928. In the act in
the process is from 1590s, perhaps originally from the 16c. sense of the act as sexual intercourse.
Act of God uncontrollable natural force recorded by 1726.    An act of God is an accident which
arises from a cause which operates without interference or aid from man (1 Pars. on Cont. 635); the
loss arising wherefrom cannot be guarded against by the ordinary exertions of human skill and
prudence so as to prevent its effect. [William Wait, General Principles of the Law, Albany, 1879]


Whig

British political party, 1657, in part perhaps a disparaging use of whigg a country bumpkin (1640s);
but mainly a shortened form of Whiggamore (1649) one of the adherents of the Presbyterian cause in
western Scotland who marched on Edinburgh in 1648 to oppose Charles I. Perhaps originally a horse
drover, from dialectal verb whig to urge forward + mare. In 1689 the name was first used in
reference to members of the British political party that opposed the Tories. American Revolution
sense of colonist who opposes Crown policies is from 1768. Later it was applied to opponents of
Andrew Jackson (as early as 1825), and taken as the name of a political party (1834) that merged
into the Republican Party in 1854-56.    [I]n the spring of 1834 Jackson's opponents adopted the
name Whig, traditional term for critics of executive usurpations. James Watson Webb, editor of the
New York Courier and Enquirer, encouraged use of the name. [Henry] Clay gave it national currency in
a speech on April 14, 1834, likening the whigs of the present day to those who had resisted George
III, and by summer it was official. [Daniel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007, p.390]   Whig
historian is recorded from 1924. Whig history is the tendency in many historians ... to emphasise
certain principles of progress in the past and to produce a story which is the ratification if not
the glorification of the present. [Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History, 1931]


