urgent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French urgent pressing, impelling (14c.), from Latin urgentem (nominative
urgens), present participle of urgere to press hard, urge (see urge (v.)). Related: Urgently.


instant (adj.)

mid-15c., present, urgent, from Old French instant (14c.), from Latin instantem (nominative instans)
pressing, urgent, literally standing near (see instant (n.)). Meaning now, present is from 1540s,
and led to the use of the word in dating of correspondence, in reference to the current month, often
abbreviated inst. and persisting at least into the mid-19c. Thus 16th inst. means sixteenth of the
current month. Sense of immediately is from 1590s. Of foods, by 1912. Televised sports instant
replay attested by 1965. Instant messaging attested by 1994.


cravings (n.)

urgent desires, 17c., from craving, verbal noun from crave.


pressing (adj.)

exerting pressure, mid-14c., present participle adjective from press (v.1). Sense of urgent,
compelling, forceful is from 1705. Related: Pressingly.


urgency (n.)

1530s, probably from urgent + -cy.


exigent (adj.)

1660s, urgent, a back-formation from exigency or else from Latin exigentem (nominative exigens),
present participle of exigere to demand (see exact (v.)).


chopstick (n.)

also chop-stick, 1690s, sailors' partial translation of Chinese k'wai tse, variously given as fast
ones or nimble boys, first element from pidgin English chop, from Cantonese kap urgent. Chopsticks,
the two-fingered piano exercise, is first attested 1893, probably from the resemblance of the
fingers to chopsticks.


necessary (adj.)

late 14c. needed, required, essential, indispensable, from Old French necessaire necessary, urgent,
compelling (13c.), and directly from Latin necessarius unavoidable, indispensable, necessary, from
necesse unavoidable, indispensable, originally no backing away, from ne- not + cedere to withdraw,
go away, yield (see cede). The root sense is of that from which there is no evasion, that which is
inevitable. Necessary house privy is from c.1600. Necessary evil is from 1540s (the original
reference was to woman).


cogent (adj.)

1650s, from French cogent necessary, urgent (14c.), from Latin cogentem (nominative cogens), present
participle of cogere to curdle; to compel; to collect, literally to drive together, from com-
together (see co-) + agere to drive (see act (n.)).


instant (n.)

late 14c., infinitely short space of time, from Old French instant (adj.) assiduous, at hand, from
Medieval Latin instantem (nominative instans), in classical Latin present, pressing, urgent,
literally standing near, present participle of instare to urge, to stand near, be present (to urge
one's case), from in- in (see in- (2)) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Elliptical use of the French adjective as a noun.


mob (n.)

1680s, disorderly part of the population, rabble, slang shortening of mobile, mobility common
people, populace, rabble (1670s, probably with a conscious play on nobility), from Latin mobile
vulgus fickle common people (the phrase attested c.1600 in English), from mobile, neuter of mobilis
fickle, movable, mobile (see mobile (adj.)). In Australia and New Zealand, used without
disparagement for a crowd. Meaning gang of criminals working together is from 1839, originally of
thieves or pick-pockets; American English sense of organized crime in general is from 1927.    The
Mob was not a synonym for the Mafia. It was an alliance of Jews, Italians, and a few Irishmen, some
of them brilliant, who organized the supply, and often the production, of liquor during the thirteen
years, ten months, and nineteen days of Prohibition. ... Their alliance -- sometimes called the
Combination but never the Mafia -- was part of the urgent process of Americanizing crime. [Pete
Hamill, Why Sinatra Matters, 1998]   Mob scene crowded place first recorded 1922.


