usage (n.)

c.1300, established practice, custom, from Anglo-French and Old French usage custom, habit,
experience; taxes levied, from us, from Latin usus use, custom (see use (v.)). From late 14c. as
service, use, act of using something.


numismatic (adj.)

1765, pertaining to historical coins and coinage, from French numismatique (late 16c.), from Latin
numismat-, stem of numisma coin, currency, from Greek nomisma current coin, money, usage, literally
what has been sanctioned by custom or usage, from nomizein have in use, adopt a custom, from nomos
custom, law, usage, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (see nemesis). Related:
Numismatical (1716). Earlier in the same sense was nummary (1650s), from Latin nummarius, from
nummus a coin.


practic (n.)

late 14c., a way of doing something, method; practice, custom, usage; also an applied science; from
Old French practique practice, usage (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin practica practice,
practical knowledge, ultimately from Greek praktike practical (as opposed to theoretical; see
practical). From early 15c. as practical aspect or application of something; practice as opposed to
theory; also, knowledge of the practical aspect of something, practical experience.


waiver (n.)

act of waiving, 1620s (modern usage is often short for waiver clause); from Anglo-French legal usage
of infinitive as a noun (see waive). Baseball waivers is recorded from 1907. Other survivals of noun
use of infinitives in Anglo-French legalese include disclaimer, merger, rejoinder, misnomer, ouster,
retainer, attainder.


gizmo (n.)

1942, Marine and Navy usage for any old thing you can't put a name to [Life magazine, July 30,
1945], of unknown origin, perhaps a made-up word.


momzer (n.)

contemptible person, moocher, 1560s, from Hebrew, literally bastard (used in Vulgate), but modern
usage is a recent borrowing from Yiddish.


brethren (n.)

alternative plural of brother (q.v.); predominant c.1200-1600s, but surviving now only in religious
usage.


crewel (n.)

embroidery, 1590s, of unknown origin. Earliest usage is late 15c., as a name for a kind of thin,
worsted yarn originally used in crewel work.


bovver

1969, Cockney pronunciation of bother trouble (q.v.), given wide extended usage in skinhead slang.


wont (n.)

habitual usage, custom, c.1400, from wont, adjective and verb.


mamma (n.)

1570s, representing the native form of the reduplication of *ma- that is nearly universal among the
Indo-European languages (Greek mamme mother, grandmother, Latin mamma, Persian mama, Russian and
Lithuanian mama mother, German Muhme mother's sister, French maman, Welsh mam mother). Probably a
natural sound in baby-talk, perhaps imitative of sound made while sucking.    Its late appearance in
English is curious, but Middle English had mome (mid-13c.) an aunt; an old woman, also an
affectionate term of address for an older woman. In educated usage, the stress is always on the last
syllable. In terms of recorded usage of related words in English, mama is from 1707, mum is from
1823, mummy in this sense from 1839, mommy 1844, momma 1852, and mom 1867.


thew (n.)

Old English &thorn;eaw usage, custom, habit; see thews.


abutment (n.)

1640s, from abut + -ment. Originally any junction; the architectural usage is attested from 1793
(the notion is of the meeting-place of the arches of a bridge, etc.).


re

with reference to, used from c.1700 in legalese, from Latin (in) re in the matter of, from ablative
case of res matter, thing. Its use is execrated by Fowler in three different sections of Modern
English Usage.


landlord (n.)

early 15c. in modern usage, from land (n.) + lord (n.).


phishing (n.)

in the cyber scam sense, by 2000 (some sources cite usage from 1995); alteration of fishing (n.);
perhaps by influence of phreak and the U.S. rock band Phish, which had been performing since 1983.


B movie (n.)

by 1939, usually said to be so called from being the second, or supporting, film in a double
feature. Some film industry sources say it was so called for being the second of the two films major
studios generally made in a year, and the one cast with less headline talent and released with less
promotion. And early usage varies with grade-B movie, suggesting a perceived association with
quality.


Lazarus

Biblical character (Luke xvi:20), the poor man covered in sores; his name was extended in medieval
usage to any poor and visibly diseased person (compare lazar, mid-14c., one deformed and nauseous
with filthy and pestilential diseases [Johnson]). The name is from a Greek rendition of Hebrew
El'azar, literally God has helped.


boughten (adj.)

irregular past participle of buy; as an adjective from 1793, especially in colloquial U.S. usage, of
clothing and other items, opposed to made.    BOUGHTEN. Which is bought. This is a common word in
the interior of New England and New York. It is applied to articles purchased from the shops, to
distinguish them from similar articles of home manufacture. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms,
1848]


Sunni (n.)

1620s, from Arabic, adherent of the Sunnah; Muslim who accepts the orthodox tradition as well as the
Quran, from Sunna traditional teachings of Muhammad (not, like the Quran, committed to writing, but
preserved from his lips by his disciples or founded on his actions), literally way, custom, course,
tradition, usage. Related: Sunnite.


nondescript (adj.)

1680s, not hitherto described, in scientific usage, coined from non- + Latin descriptus, past
participle of describere (see describe). General sense of not easily described or classified is from
1806.


premier (n.)

1711 in the political sense, a shortening of premier minister (1680s); see premier (adj.). In U.S.
usage, premier formerly was applied occasionally to the Secretary of State (1855-c.1900).


Argive (adj.)

of Argos, hence, especially in Homeric usage, the Greeks, as a byword for Achaean (he describes
Agamemnon as king of Argos), 1520s, from Latin Argivus, from Greek Argeios of Argos.


cynicism (n.)

1670s, philosophy of the Cynics, from cynic + -ism. Meaning cynical character is from 1847. For
nuances of usage of cynicism, see humor.


beholden (adj.)

under obligation, mid-14c., originally past participle of behold (and preserving the original past
participle of hold), but a sense directly related to this usage is not recorded among the many and
varied meanings attested for behold.


domineer (v.)

1580s, from Dutch domineren to rule (16c.), from Middle French dominer, from Latin dominari to rule,
'lord' it over (see domination). Shakespeare's usage is not the earliest in English. Related:
Domineering.


coil (v.)

to wind, 1610s, from Middle French coillir to gather, pick, from Latin colligere to gather together
(see collect). Meaning specialized perhaps in nautical usage. Related: Coiled; coiling.


bounder (n.)

1560s, one who sets bounds, agent noun from bound (v.1); British English slang meaning person of
objectionable social behavior, would-be stylish person, is from 1882, perhaps from bound (v.2) on
notion of one trying to bound into high society, but earliest usage suggests one outside the bounds
of acceptable socializing, which would connect it with the noun.


acronym (n.)

word formed from the first letters of a series of words, 1943, American English coinage from acro- +
-onym name (abstracted from homonym; see name (n.)). But for cabalistic esoterica and acrostic
poetry, the practice was practically <b>non-existent before 20c.</b> For distinction of usage, see
initialism.


Celt (n.)

also Kelt, c.1600, from Latin Celta, singular of Celtae, from Greek Keltoi, Herodotus' word for the
Gauls (who also were called Galatai). Used by the Romans of continental Gauls but apparently not of
the British Celtic tribes. Originally in English in reference to ancient peoples; extention to their
modern descendants is from mid-19c., from French usage.


use (n.)

c.1200, act of employing, from Anglo-French and Old French us custom, practice, usage, from Latin
usus use, custom, practice, employment, skill, habit, from past participle stem of uti (see use
(v.)).


apothegm (n.)

pithy saying, 1550s, from Greek apophthegma terse, pointed saying, literally something clearly
spoken, from apophthengesthai to speak one's opinion plainly, from apo- from (see apo-) +
phthengesthai to utter. See aphorism for nuances of usage. Spelling apophthegm, restored by Johnson,
is preferred in England, according to OED.


balaclava (n.)

woolen head covering, especially worn by soldiers, evidently named for village near Sebastopol,
Russia, site of a battle Oct. 25, 1854, in the Crimean War. But the term (originally Balaclava
helmet) does not appear before 1881 and seems to have come into widespread use in the Boer War. The
British troops suffered from the cold in the Crimean War, and the usage might be a remembrance of
that conflict. The town name (Balaklava) often is said to be from Turkish, but is perhaps folk-
etymologized from a Greek original Palakion.


stake (v.2)

to risk, wager, 1520s, perhaps from notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed (see stake
(n.2)), though Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor in this usage.
Meaning to maintain surveillance (usually stake out) is first recorded 1942, American English
colloquial, probably form earlier sense of mark off territory. Related: Staked; staking.


plaintiff (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French pleintif (late 13c.), noun use of Old French plaintif complaining;
wretched, miserable, from plainte (see plaint). Identical with plaintive at first; the form that
receded into legal usage retained the older -iff spelling.


leman (n.)

sweetheart, paramour (archaic), late 13c., from Middle English leofman (c.1200), from Old English
leof dear (see lief) + man human being, person (see man (n.)). Originally of either gender, though
deliberate archaic usage tends to limit it to women.


nomothetic (adj.)

lawgiving, legislative; based on law, 1650s, from Greek nomothetikos relating to legislation,
legislative, from nomothetes lawgiving, from nomos usage, custom, law (see numismatics) + thetes one
who puts, places, or establishes. Related: Nomothetical (1610s.)


jape (v.)

late 14c., to trick, beguile, jilt, perhaps from Old French japer to howl, bawl, scream, of echoic
origin, or from Old French gaber to mock, deride. Phonetics suits the former, but sense the latter
explanation. Took on a slang sense mid-15c. of have sex with, and disappeared from polite usage.
Revived in harmless Middle English sense of say or do something in jest by Scott, etc. Related:
Japed; japing.


feverfew (n.)

Old English feferfuge, from Late Latin febrifugia, from Latin febris fever (see fever) + fugare put
to flight; so called for its medical usage. The modern English word probably is from an Anglo-French
source.


fry (n.)

young fish, late 13c., from Anglo-French frei, from Old French frai spawn, from froier to rub, spawn
(by rubbing abdomen on sand). First applied to human offspring 14c. in Scottish, though OED and some
other sources trace this usage to Old Norse frjo, fr&aelig; seed, offspring.


China (n.)

Asian country name, 1550s, of uncertain origin, probably ultimately from Sanskrit Cina-s the Chinese
(earliest European usage is in Italian, by Marco Polo), perhaps from Qin dynasty, which ruled 3c.
B.C.E. Latinized as Sina, hence sinologist. The Chinese word for the country is Chung-kuo (Wade-
Giles), Zhongguo (Pinyin).


carouse (v.)

1550s, from Middle French carousser drink, quaff, swill, from German gar aus quite out, from gar
austrinken; trink garaus to drink up entirely. Frequently also as an adverb in early English usage
(to drink carouse).


estop (v.)

1530s, from Anglo-French estopper to stop, bar, hinder (especially in a legal sense, by one's own
prior act or declaration), from Old French estoper plug, stop up, block; prevent, halt (also in
obscene usage), from estope tow, oakum, from Latin stuppa tow (used as a plug); see stop (v.).


Algeria

North African country, named for Algiers, city chosen by the French as its capital when they
colonized it in 1830 + Latinate country suffix -ia. The city name is Arabic al-Jazair, literally the
islands, in reference to four islands formerly off the coast but joined to the mainland since 1525.
A resident of the place formerly was an Algerine (1650s), and the word was practically synonymous
with pirate in English and U.S. usage early 19c.


homestead (n.)

Old English hamstede home, town, village, from home (n.) + stead (q.v.). In U.S. usage, a lot of
land adequate for the maintenance of a family (1690s), defined by the Homestead Act of 1862 as 160
acres. Hence, the verb, first recorded 1872. Homesteader also is from 1872.


bandwagon (n.)

also band-wagon, 1855, American English, from band (n.2) + wagon, originally a large wagon used to
carry the band in a circus procession; as these also figured in celebrations of successful political
campaigns, being on the bandwagon came to represent attaching oneself to anything that looks likely
to succeed, a usage first attested 1899 in writings of Theodore Roosevelt.


irony (n.)

c.1500, from Latin ironia, from Greek eironeia dissimulation, assumed ignorance, from eiron
dissembler, perhaps related to eirein to speak (see verb). Used in Greek of affected ignorance,
especially that of Socrates. For nuances of usage, see humor. Figurative use for condition opposite
to what might be expected; contradictory circumstances is from 1640s.


dingbat (n.)

1838, American English, some kind of alcoholic drink, of unknown origin. One of that class of words
(such as dingus, doohickey, gadget, gizmo, thingumabob) which are conjured up to supply names for
items whose proper names are unknown or not recollected. Used at various periods for money, a
professional tramp, a muffin, a typographical ornament, male genitalia, a Chinese, an Italian, a
woman who is neither your sister nor your mother, and a foolish person in authority. Popularized in
sense of foolish person by U.S. TV show All in the Family (1971-79), though this usage dates from
1905.


bay (n.3)

howl of a dog, early 14c., earlier howling chorus raised (by hounds) when in contact with the hunted
animal, c.1300, from Old French bayer, from PIE root *bai- echoic of howling (compare Greek bauzein,
Latin baubari to bark, English bow-wow; also see bawl). From the hunting usage comes the transferred
sense of final encounter, and thence, on the notion of putting up an effective defense, at bay.


Maranatha

late 14c., a Bible word, from Greek maranatha, untranslated Semitic word in I Cor. xvi:22, where it
follows Greek anathema, and therefore has been taken as part of a phrase and used as a curse.
Usually assumed to be from Aramaic maran atha Our Lord has come, which would make the common usage
erroneous (see OED entry), but possibly it is a false transliteration of Hebrew mohoram atta you are
put under the ban, which would make more sense in the context. [Klein]


