usury (n.)

c.1300, practice of lending money at interest, later, at excessive rates of interest, from Medieval
Latin usuria, alteration of Latin usura payment for the use of money, interest, literally a usage,
use, enjoyment, from usus, from stem of uti (see use (v.)). From mid-15c. as premium paid for the
use of money, interest, especially exorbitant interest.


usurious (adj.)

c.1600, from usury + -ous. Related: Usuriously.


hire (n.)

payment for work, use, or services; wages, from Old English hyr wages; interest, usury, from Proto-
Germanic *hurja- (see hire (v.)).


usurer (n.)

late 13c., one who lends money at interest, but later especially one who lends money at an
exorbitant rate of interest, from Anglo-French usurer, Old French usurier, usureor, from Medieval
Latin usurarius money-lender, usurer, from Latin usurarius (adj.) pertaining to interest; that pays
interest, from usura (see usury).


interest (n.)

mid-15c., legal claim or right; concern; benefit, advantage; earlier interesse (late 14c.), from
Anglo-French interesse what one has a legal concern in, from Medieval Latin interesse compensation
for loss, noun use of Latin interresse to concern, make a difference, be of importance, literally to
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + esse to be (see essence).    Compare German
Interesse, from the same Medieval Latin source. Form in English influenced 15c. by French interest
damage, from Latin interest it is of importance, it makes a difference, third person singular
present of interresse. Financial sense of money paid for the use of money lent (1520s) earlier was
distinguished from usury (illegal under Church law) by being in reference to compensation due from a
defaulting debtor. Meaning curiosity is first attested 1771. Interest group is attested from 1907;
interest rate by 1868.


capital (n.1)

early 15c., a capital letter, from capital (adj.). The meaning capital city is first recorded 1660s
(the Old English word was heafodstol). The financial sense is from 1610s (Middle English had chief
money principal fund, mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin capitale stock, property, noun use of neuter of
capitalis capital, chief, first. (The noun use of this adjective in classical Latin was for a
capital crime.)    [The term capital] made its first appearance in medieval Latin as an adjective
capitalis (from caput, head) modifying the word pars, to designate the principal sum of a money
loan. The principal part of a loan was contrasted with the usury--later called interest--the payment
made to the lender in addition to the return of the sum lent. This usage, unknown to classical
Latin, had become common by the thirteenth century and possibly had begun as early as 1100 A.D., in
the first chartered towns of Europe. [Frank A. Fetter, Reformulation of the Concepts of Capital and
Income in Economics and Accounting, 1937, in Capital, Interest, &amp; Rent, 1977]    Also see
cattle, and compare sense development of fee, pecuniary.


