V

In Middle English, -u- and -v- were used interchangeably, though with a preference for v- as the
initial letter (vnder, vain, etc.) and -u- elsewhere (full, euer, etc.). The distinction into
consonant and vowel identities was established in English by 1630, under influence of continental
printers, but into 19c. some dictionaries and other catalogues continued to list -u- and -v- words
as a single series.    No native Anglo-Saxon words begin in v- except those (vane, vat, vixen)
altered by the southwestern England habit of replacing initial f- with v- (and initial s- with z-).
Confusion of -v- and -w- also was a characteristic of 16c. Cockney accents.    As a Roman numeral,
five. In German rocket weapons systems of World War II, it stood for Vergeltungswaffe reprisal
weapon. V-eight as a type of motor engine is recorded from 1929 (V-engine is attested from 1909), so
called for the arrangement. The V for victory hand sign was conceived January 1941 by Belgian
politician and resistance leader Victor de Laveleye, to signify French victoire and Flemish vrijheid
(freedom). It was broadcast into Europe by Radio Belgi&#235;/Radio Belgique and popularized by the
BBC by June 1941, from which time it became a universal allied gesture.


V.D. (n.)

1920, short for venereal disease (see venereal).


v.i.

abbreviation of Latin vide infra, literally see below.


vac

1709 as a colloquial shortening of vacation (n.); 1942 as a colloquial shortening of vacuum (v.);
1974 as a colloquial shortening of vacuum cleaner.


vacancy (n.)

1570s, a vacating; c.1600, state of being vacant, from Late Latin vacantia, from Latin vacans empty,
unoccupied, present participle of vacare be empty (see vain). From 1690s as a vacant office or post;
meaning available room at a hotel is recorded from 1953. Related: Vacance (1530s); vacancies.


vacant (adj.)

c.1300, not filled, held, or occupied, from Old French vacant idle, unoccupied (of an office, etc.),
from Latin vacantem (nominative vacans), empty, unoccupied, present participle of vacare to be empty
(see vain). Meaning characterized by absence of mental occupation is from 1570s. Related: Vacantly.


vacate (v.)

1640s, to make void, to annul, from Latin vacatus, past participle of vacare be empty, be void (see
vain). Meaning to leave, give up, quit (a place) is attested from 1791. Related: Vacated; vacating.


vacation (n.)

late 14c., freedom from obligations, leisure, release (from some activity or occupation), from Old
French vacacion vacancy, vacant position (14c.) and directly from Latin vacationem (nominative
vacatio) leisure, freedom, exemption, a being free from duty, immunity earned by service, noun of
state from past participle stem of vacare be empty, free, or at leisure (see vain).    Meanings
state of being unoccupied, process of vacating in English are early 15c. Meaning formal suspension
of activity, time in which there is an intermission of usual employment (in reference to schools,
courts, etc.) is recorded from mid-15c. As the U.S. equivalent of what in Britain is called a
holiday, it is attested from 1878.


vacation (v.)

1866, from vacation (n.). Related: Vacationed; vacationing.


vaccinate (v.)

1803, to inoculate with a vaccine, originally with cowpox for the purpose of procuring immunity from
smallpox, back-formation from vaccination. Related: Vaccinated; vaccinating.


vaccination (n.)

1800, used by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) for the technique he devised of preventing
smallpox by injecting people with the cowpox virus (variolae vaccinae), from vaccine (adj.)
pertaining to cows, from cows (1798), from Latin vaccinus from cows, from vacca cow (Latin bos cow
being originally ox, a loan word from a rural dialect according to Buck, who cites Umbrian bue). The
use of the term for diseases other than smallpox is due to Pasteur [OED].


vaccine (n.)

matter used in vaccination, 1846, from French vaccin, noun use of adjective, from Latin vaccina,
fem. of vaccinus pertaining to a cow (see vaccination). Related: Vaccinal; vaccinic.


vacillate (v.)

1590s, to sway unsteadily, from Latin vacillatus, past participle of vacillare sway to and fro;
hesitate (see vacillation). Meaning to waver between two opinions or courses is recorded from 1620s.
Related: Vacillated; vacillates; vacillating.


vacillation (n.)

c.1400, hesitation, uncertainty, from Latin vacillationem (nominative vacillatio) a reeling,
wavering, noun of action from past participle stem of vacillare sway to and fro, waver, hesitate, be
untrustworthy, of uncertain origin. Originally in reference to opinion or conduct; literal sense is
recorded from 1630s.


vacuity (n.)

late 14c., hollow space, from Latin vacuitas empty space, emptiness, absence, vacancy, freedom, from
vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)). Originally in anatomy. Meaning vacancy of mind or thought is
attested from 1590s.


vacuole (n.)

small cavity or vesicle, 1853, from French vacuole, from Medieval Latin vacuola, formed as a
diminutive of Latin vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)).


vacuous (adj.)

1640s, empty (implied in vacuousness), from Latin vacuus empty, void, free (see vacuum (n.)).
Figurative sense of empty of ideas, without intelligent expression is from 1848. Related: Vacuously.


vacuum (v.)

to clean with a vacuum cleaner, 1919, from vacuum (n.). Related: Vacuumed; vacuuming.


vacuum (n.)

1540s, emptiness of space, from Latin vacuum an empty space, vacant place, a void, noun use of
neuter of vacuus empty, unoccupied, devoid of, figuratively free, unoccupied, related to vacare be
empty (see vain). Properly a loan-translation of Greek kenon, literally that which is empty. Meaning
a space emptied of air is attested from 1650s. Vacuum tube glass thermionic device is attested from
1859. Vacuum cleaner is from 1903; shortened form vacuum (n.) first recorded 1910.    The
metaphysicians of Elea, Parmenides and Melissus, started the notion that a vacuum was impossible,
and this became a favorite doctrine with Aristotle. All the scholastics upheld the maxim that nature
abhors a vacuum. [Century Dictionary]


vade

Latin, imperative singular of vadere to go (see vamoose).


vade-mecum (n.)

a pocket manual, handbook, 1620s, Latin, literally go with me; from imperative of vadere to go (see
vamoose) + me me + cum with.


vae victis

Latin, literally woe to the vanquished, from Livy, History V.xlviii.9.


vagabond (adj.)

early 15c. (earlier vacabond, c.1400), from Old French vagabond, vacabond wandering, unsteady
(14c.), from Late Latin vagabundus wandering, strolling about, from Latin vagari wander (from vagus
wandering, undecided; see vague) + gerundive suffix -bundus.


vagabond (n.)

c.1400, earlier wagabund (in a criminal indictment from 1311); see vagabond (adj.). Despite the
earliest use, in Middle English often merely one who is without a settled home, a vagrant but not
necessarily in a bad sense. Notion of idle, disreputable person predominated from 17c.


vagal (adj.)

pertaining to the vagus, 1846, from vagus + -al (1).


vagary (n.)

1570s, a wandering, a roaming journey, from Italian vagare or directly from Latin vagari to wander,
stroll about, roam, be unsettled, spread abroad, from vagus roving, wandering (see vague). The
infinitive appears to have been adopted in English as a noun and conformed to nouns in -ary, but
this can hardly be explained except as an orig. university use [Century Dictionary]. Current meaning
of eccentric notion or conduct (1620s) is from notion of mental wandering. Related: Vagaries.


vagina (n.)

sexual passage of the female from the vulva to the uterus, 1680s, medical Latin, from specialized
use of Latin vagina sheath, scabbard, covering; sheath of an ear of grain, hull, husk (plural
vaginae), from PIE *wag-ina- (cognates: Lithuanian vo&#382;iu ro cover with a hollow thing), from
root *wag- to break, split, bite. Probably the ancient notion is of a sheath made from a split piece
of wood (see sheath). A modern medical word; the Latin word was not used in an anatomical sense in
classical times. Anthropological vagina dentata is attested from 1902.


vaginal (adj.)

1726, pertaining to a sheath, from vagina + -al (1). From 1800 as pertaining to the vagina of a
female. Related: Vaginally.


vaginismus (n.)

spasmodic narrowing of the orifice of the vagina, 1861, medical Latin, from vagina + -ismus (see
-ism).


vaginitis (n.)

inflammation of the vagina, 1833, medical Latin; see vagina + -itis.


vagitus (n.)

crying of a newborn child, 1650s, from Latin vagitus a crying, squalling, from vagire (see sough
(v.)).


vagrancy (n.)

life of idle begging, 1706, from vagrant + -cy. Earlier in a figurative sense, mental wandering
(1640s). By late 18c. used in law as a catch-all for miscellaneous petty offenses against public
order.


vagrant (n.)

mid-15c., person who lacks regular employment, one without fixed abode, a tramp, probably from
Anglo-French vageraunt, also wacrant, walcrant, which is said in many sources to be a noun use of
the past participle of Old French walcrer to wander, from Frankish (Germanic) *walken, from the same
source as Old Norse valka wander and English walk (v.).    Under this theory the word was influenced
by Old French vagant, vagaunt wandering, from Latin vagantem (nominative vagans), past participle of
vagari to wander, stroll about (see vagary). But on another theory the Anglo-French word ultimately
is from Old French vagant, with an intrusive -r-. Middle English also had vagaunt wandering, without
fixed abode (late 14c.), from Old French vagant.


vagrant (adj.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French vagarant, waucrant, and sharing with it the history to be found under
vagrant (n.). Dogberry's corruption vagrom (Much Ado about Nothing) persisted through 19c. in
learned jocularity.


vague (adj.)

uncertain as to specifics, 1540s, from Middle French vague empty, vacant; wild, uncultivated;
wandering (13c.), from Latin vagus strolling, wandering, rambling, figuratively vacillating,
uncertain, of unknown origin. Related: Vagueness.


vaguely (adv.)

1748, from vague + -ly (2).


vagus (n.)

plural vagi, 1840, pneumogastric nerve, the long, widely distributed nerve from the brain to the
upper body, from Latin vagus wandering, straying (see vague).


vail (n.)

advantage, profit, early 15c., from vail (v.) to be of use or service (c.1300), from Old French
vail, from valoir to be of value or worth (see value (n.)).


vain (adj.)

c.1300, devoid of real value, idle, unprofitable, from Old French vain, vein worthless, void,
invalid, feeble; conceited (12c.), from Latin vanus empty, void, figuratively idle, fruitless, from
PIE *wa-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (cognates: Old English wanian to lessen,
wan deficient; Old Norse vanta to lack; Latin vacare to be empty, vastus empty, waste; Avestan va-
lack, Persian vang empty, poor; Sanskrit una- deficient, Armenian unain empty).    Meaning
conceited, elated with a high opinion of oneself first recorded 1690s in English; earlier silly,
idle, foolish (late 14c.). Phrase in vain to no effect (c.1300, after Latin in vanum) preserves the
original sense. Related: Vainly; vainness. Compare also vainglory.


vainglorious (adj.)

early 15c., from vainglory + -ous, or from Old French vain glorios boastful, swaggering. Related:
Vaingloriously; vaingloriousness. Groce (Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd ed., 1796)
has vain-glorious man One who boasts without reason, or, as the canters say, pisses more than he
drinks.


vainglory (n.)

c.1200, worthless glory, undue pomp or show, waynglori, from Old French vaine glorie, from Medieval
Latin vana gloria (see vain + glory (n.)).


vair (n.)

squirrel fur, or some other kind of fur in use in the Middle Ages, c.1300, from Old French vair two-
toned squirrel fur; fur garments (12c.), from Latin varium, masculine accusative singular of varius
parti-colored (see vary). Gray or black above and white below.


valance (n.)

piece of hanging, decorative drapery, mid-15c., of uncertain origin, probably from Anglo-French
*valaunce, valence, from valer go down, let down, variant of Old French avaler descend, go down; or
possibly from the plural of Old French avalant, from present participle of avaler go down. The
notion is of something hanging down. Not now considered to be from the name of Valence in
southwestern France, which is from the Roman personal name Valentius. Related: Valenced.


vale (n.)

river-land between two ranges of hills, early 14c., from Old French val valley, vale (12c.), from
Latin vallem (nominative vallis, valles) valley  (see valley). Now little used except in poetry
[Century Dictionary]. Vale of years old age is from Othello. Vale of tears this world as a place of
trouble is attested from 1550s.


valediction (n.)

a farewell, a bidding farewell, 1610s, from past participle stem of Latin valedicere bid farewell,
take leave, from vale farewell!, second person singular imperative of valere be well, be strong (see
valiant) + dicere to say (see diction).


valedictorian (n.)

student who pronounces the oration at commencement exercises of his or her class, 1832, American
English, from valedictory + -ian. As an adjective from 1834.


valedictory (adj.)

1650s, pertaining or relating to leave-taking, from Latin valedictum (past participle of valedicere;
see valediction) + -ory. As a noun meaning valedictory address from 1779.


valence (n.)

early 15c., extract, preparation, from Latin valentia strength, capacity, from valentem (nominative
valens) strong, stout, vigorous, powerful, present participle of valere be strong (see valiant).
Meaning relative combining capacity of an element is recorded from 1884, from German Valenz (1868),
from the Latin word. Related: Valency.


Valencia

place in Spain, Roman Valentia Edetanorum fort of the Edetani, a local people name; the first
element from Latin valentia strength (see valence (n.)).


Valentine (n.)

mid-15c., sweetheart chosen on St. Valentine's Day, from Late Latin Valentinus, the name of two
early Italian saints (from Latin valentia strength, capacity; see valence). Choosing a sweetheart on
this day originated 14c. as a custom in English and French court circles. Meaning letter or card
sent to a sweetheart first recorded 1824. The romantic association of the day is said to be from it
being around the time when birds choose their mates.    For this was on seynt Volantynys day  Whan
euery bryd cometh there to chese his make.  [Chaucer, Parlement of Foules, c.1381]    Probably the
date was the informal first day of spring in whatever French region invented the custom (many
surviving medieval calendars reckon the start of spring on the 7th or 22nd of February). No evidence
connects it with the Roman Lupercalia (an 18c. theory) or to any romantic or avian quality in either
of the saints. The custom of sending special cards or letters on this date flourished in England
c.1840-1870, declined around the turn of the 20th century, and revived 1920s.    To speak of the
particular Customs of the English Britons, I shall begin with Valentine's Day, Feb. 14. when young
Men and Maidens get their several Names writ down upon Scrolls of Paper rolled up, and lay 'em
asunder, the Men drawing the Maidens Names, and these the Mens; upon which, the Men salute their
chosen Valentines and present them with Gloves, &amp;c.; This Custom (which sometimes introduces a
Match) is grounded upon the Instinct of Animals, which about this Time of the Year, feeling a new
Heat by the approach of the Sun, begin to couple. [The Present State of Great Britain and Ireland
London, 1723]


