vacillate (v.)

1590s, to sway unsteadily, from Latin vacillatus, past participle of vacillare sway to and fro;
hesitate (see vacillation). Meaning to waver between two opinions or courses is recorded from 1620s.
Related: Vacillated; vacillates; vacillating.


dither (v.)

1640s, to quake, tremble, phonetic variant of Middle English didderen (late 14c.), of uncertain
origin. The sense of vacillate, be anxious is from 1819. Related: Dithered; dithering.


shilly-shally (v.)

to vacillate, 1782, from adverbial expression to stand shilly-shally (1703), earlier shill I, shall
I (1700), a fanciful reduplication of shall I? (compare wishy-washy, dilly-dally, etc.). From 1734
as an adjective, by 1755 as a noun. Related: Shilly-shallying (1816).


wipe (v.)

Old English wipian to wipe, cleanse, from Proto-Germanic *wipjan to move back and forth (cognates:
Danish vippe, Middle Dutch, Dutch vippen, Old High German wifan to swing), from PIE *weip- to turn,
vacillate, tremble (source of Latin vibrare to shake; see vibrate).


waffle (v.)

1690s, to yelp, bark, frequentative of provincial waff to yelp, to bark like a puppy (1610);
possibly of imitative origin. Figurative sense of talk foolishly (c.1700) led to that of vacillate,
equivocate (1803), originally a Scottish and northern English usage. Late 17c. Scottish also had
waff act of waving, variant of waft, which might have influenced the sense. Related: Waffled;
waffler; waffling.


vibrate (v.)

1610s (intransitive) move to and fro; 1660s, swing to and fro; from Latin vibratus, past participle
of vibrare set in tremulous motion, move quickly to and fro, quiver, tremble, shake, from PIE *wib-
ro-, from root *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically, move quickly to and fro (cognates:
Lithuanian wyburiu to wag (the tail), Danish vippe, Dutch wippen to swing, Old English wipan to
wipe). Transitive sense cause to vibrate is from c.1700. Related: Vibrated; vibrating.


whip (v.)

mid-13c., wippen flap violently, not in Old English, of uncertain origin, ultimately from Proto-
Germanic *wipjan to move back and forth (cognates: Danish vippe to raise with a swipe, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wippen to swing, Old High German wipf swing, impetus), from PIE *weip- to turn, vacillate,
tremble (see vibrate). The senses of both [noun and verb] no doubt represent several independent
adoptions or formations [OED]. The cookery sense is from 1670s. Related: Whipped; whipping. Whip
snake first recorded 1774, so called for its shape.


wag (v.)

early 13c. (intransitive), waver, vacillate, lack steadfastness, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse vagga a cradle, Danish vugge rock a cradle, Old Swedish wagga fluctuate, rock a
cradle), and in part from Old English wagian move backwards and forwards; all from Proto-Germanic
*wag- (cognates: Old High German weggen, Gothic wagjan to wag), probably from PIE root *wegh- to
move about (see weigh).    Transitive meaning move (something) back and forth or up and down is from
c.1300; of dogs and their tails from mid-15c.: and whanne they [hounds] see the hure maystre they
wol make him cheere and wagge hur tayles upon him. [Edward, Duke of York, The Master of Game, 1456].
Related: Wagged; wagging. Wag-at-the-wall (1825) was an old name for a hanging clock with pendulum
and weights exposed.


waif (n.)

late 14c., unclaimed property, flotsam, stray animal, from Anglo-French waif (13c., Old French
guaif) ownerless property, something lost; as an adjective, not claimed, outcast, abandoned,
probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veif waving thing, flag, from Proto-Germanic
*waif-, from PIE *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically (see vibrate). Compare Medieval
Latin waivium thing thrown away by a thief in flight. A Scottish/northern English parallel form was
wavenger (late 15c.).    Meaning person (especially a child) without home or friends first attested
1784, from legal phrase waif and stray (1620s), from the adjective in the sense lost, strayed,
homeless. Neglected children being uncommonly thin, the word tended toward this sense. Connotations
of fashionable, small, slender woman began 1991 with application to childishly slim supermodels such
as Kate Moss.


