vagabond (n.)

c.1400, earlier wagabund (in a criminal indictment from 1311); see vagabond (adj.). Despite the
earliest use, in Middle English often merely one who is without a settled home, a vagrant but not
necessarily in a bad sense. Notion of idle, disreputable person predominated from 17c.


vagabond (adj.)

early 15c. (earlier vacabond, c.1400), from Old French vagabond, vacabond wandering, unsteady
(14c.), from Late Latin vagabundus wandering, strolling about, from Latin vagari wander (from vagus
wandering, undecided; see vague) + gerundive suffix -bundus.


palliard (n.)

late 15c., vagabond or beggar (who sleeps on straw in barns), from Middle French paillard, from Old
French paillart tramp, beggar, vagabond (13c.), from paille straw (see pallet (n.1); also see -ard).


truant (n.)

c.1200, beggar, vagabond, from Old French truant beggar, rogue (12c.), as an adjective, wretched,
miserable, of low caste, from Gaulish *trougant- (compare Breton *truan, later truant vagabond,
Welsh truan wretch, Gaelic truaghan wretched), of uncertain origin. Compare Spanish truhan buffoon,
from same source. Meaning one who wanders from an appointed place, especially a child who stays away
from school without leave is first attested mid-15c.


harlot (n.)

c.1200 (late 12c. in surnames), vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue, from Old French
herlot, arlot vagabond, tramp (usually male in Middle English and Old French), with forms in Old
Proven&ccedil;al (arlot), Old Spanish (arlote), and Italian (arlotto); of unknown origin. Used in
both positive and pejorative senses by Chaucer; applied in Middle English to jesters, buffoons,
jugglers, later to actors. Sense of prostitute, unchaste woman probably had developed by 14c.,
certainly by early 15c., but this was reinforced by use as euphemism for strumpet, whore in 16c.
translations of the Bible. The word may be Germanic, with an original sense of camp follower, if the
first element is hari army, as some suspect.


striker (n.)

late 14c., vagabond, agent noun from strike (v.). From mid-15c. as coiner; 1580s as fighter; 1850 as
worker on strike; 1963 as a soccer position.


tatterdemalion (n.)

ragged child, person dressed in old clothes, c.1600, probably from tatter (n.), with fantastic
second element, but perhaps also suggested by Tartar, with a contemporary sense of vagabond, gypsy.


raver (n.)

c.1400, madman, agent noun from rave (v.). Meaning attendee at a mass party is from 1991. In Old
French, the noun resveor meant vagabond, night-prowler.


tramp (n.)

person who wanders about, idle vagrant, vagabond, 1660s, from tramp (v). Sense of steamship which
takes cargo wherever it can be traded (as opposed to one running a regular line) is attested from
c.1880. The meaning promiscuous woman is from 1922. Sense of a long, toilsome walk is from 1786.


gad (v.)

to rove about, mid-15c., perhaps a back-formation from Middle English gadeling (Old English
g&aelig;deling) kinsman, fellow, companion in arms, but which had a deteriorated sense of rogue,
vagabond by c.1300 (it also had a meaning wandering, but this is attested only from 16c.); or else
it should be associated with gad (n.) a goad for driving cattle. Related: Gadding.


stroll (v.)

c.1600, a cant word introduced from the Continent, probably from dialectal German strollen, variant
of Swiss German strolchen to stroll about, loaf, from Strolch vagabond, vagrant, also fortuneteller,
perhaps from Italian astrologo astrologer. Related: Strolled; strolling.


railroad (v.)

to convict quickly and perhaps unjustly, 1873, American English, from railroad (n.).    A person
knowing more than might be desirable of the affairs, or perhaps the previous life of some powerful
individual, high in authority, might some day ventilate his knowledge, possibly before a court of
justice; but if his wisdom is railroaded to State's prison, his evidence becomes harmless.
[Wanderings of a Vagabond, New York, 1873]    Related: Railroaded; railroading. An earlier verb
sense was to have a mania for building railroads (1847).


loafer (n.)

idler, person who loafs, 1830, of uncertain origin, often regarded as a variant of land loper
(1795), a partial loan-translation of German Landl&auml;ufer vagabond, from Land land + L&auml;ufer
runner, from laufen to run (see leap (v.)). But OED finds this connection not very probable. As a
type of shoe, 1937. Related: Loafers.


erroneous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French erroneus and directly from Latin erroneus vagrant, wandering (in Late
Latin erroneous), from erronem (nominative erro) vagabond, from errare to wander, err (see err).
Related: Erroneously.


interloper (n.)

1590s, enterloper, unauthorized trader trespassing on privileges of chartered companies, probably a
hybrid from inter- between + -loper (from landloper vagabond, adventurer, also, according to
Johnson, a term of reproach used by seamen of those who pass their lives on shore); perhaps a
dialectal form of leap, or from Middle Dutch loper runner, rover, from lopen to run, from Proto-
Germanic *hlaupan to leap (see leap (v.)). General sense of self-interested intruder is from 1630s.


rogue (n.)

1560s, idle vagrant, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a
begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an
agent noun in English from Latin rogare to ask. Another theory [Klein] traces it to Celtic (compare
Breton rog haughty); OED says, There is no evidence of connexion with F. rogue 'arrogant.'     In
playful or affectionate use, one who is mischievous, 1590s. Meaning large wild beast living apart
from the herd is from 1859, originally of elephants. Meaning something uncontrolled or undisciplined
is from 1964. Also common in 17c. as a verb. Rogue's gallery police collection of mug shots is
attested from 1859.


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


