vagary (n.)

1570s, a wandering, a roaming journey, from Italian vagare or directly from Latin vagari to wander,
stroll about, roam, be unsettled, spread abroad, from vagus roving, wandering (see vague). The
infinitive appears to have been adopted in English as a noun and conformed to nouns in -ary, but
this can hardly be explained except as an orig. university use [Century Dictionary]. Current meaning
of eccentric notion or conduct (1620s) is from notion of mental wandering. Related: Vagaries.


vagrant (n.)

mid-15c., person who lacks regular employment, one without fixed abode, a tramp, probably from
Anglo-French vageraunt, also wacrant, walcrant, which is said in many sources to be a noun use of
the past participle of Old French walcrer to wander, from Frankish (Germanic) *walken, from the same
source as Old Norse valka wander and English walk (v.).    Under this theory the word was influenced
by Old French vagant, vagaunt wandering, from Latin vagantem (nominative vagans), past participle of
vagari to wander, stroll about (see vagary). But on another theory the Anglo-French word ultimately
is from Old French vagant, with an intrusive -r-. Middle English also had vagaunt wandering, without
fixed abode (late 14c.), from Old French vagant.


machine (n.)

1540s, structure of any kind, from Middle French machine device, contrivance, from Latin machina
machine, engine, military machine; device, trick; instrument (source also of Spanish maquina,
Italian macchina), from Greek makhana, Doric variant of mekhane device, means, related to mekhos
means, expedient, contrivance, from PIE *maghana- that which enables, from root *magh- (1) to be
able, have power (cognates: Old Church Slavonic mogo be able, Old English m&aelig;g I can; see may
(v.)).    Main modern sense of device made of moving parts for applying mechanical power (1670s)
probably grew out of mid-17c. senses of apparatus, appliance and military siege-tower. In late 19c.
slang the word was used for both penis and vagina, one of the few so honored. Political sense is
U.S. slang, first recorded 1876. Machine age is attested by 1851:    The idea of remodelling society
at public meetings is one of the least reasonable which ever entered the mind of an agitator: and
the notion that the relations of the sexes can be re-arranged and finally disposed of by preamble
and resolution, is one of the latest, as it should have been the last, vagary of a machine age. [The
Literary World, Nov. 1, 1851]   Machine for living (in) house translates Le Corbusier's machine
&agrave; habiter (1923).


