vagrant (adj.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French vagarant, waucrant, and sharing with it the history to be found under
vagrant (n.). Dogberry's corruption vagrom (Much Ado about Nothing) persisted through 19c. in
learned jocularity.


vagrant (n.)

mid-15c., person who lacks regular employment, one without fixed abode, a tramp, probably from
Anglo-French vageraunt, also wacrant, walcrant, which is said in many sources to be a noun use of
the past participle of Old French walcrer to wander, from Frankish (Germanic) *walken, from the same
source as Old Norse valka wander and English walk (v.).    Under this theory the word was influenced
by Old French vagant, vagaunt wandering, from Latin vagantem (nominative vagans), past participle of
vagari to wander, stroll about (see vagary). But on another theory the Anglo-French word ultimately
is from Old French vagant, with an intrusive -r-. Middle English also had vagaunt wandering, without
fixed abode (late 14c.), from Old French vagant.


piker (n.)

miserly person, 1872, formerly poor migrant to California (1860), earlier pike (1854), perhaps
originally vagrant who wanders the pike (n.1) (which is the notion in Sussex dialectal piker
vagrant, tramp, gypsy, 1838), but Barnhart, OED and others suggest the American English word
ultimately is a reference to people from Pike County, Missouri.


arrant (adj.)

late 14c., variant of errant (q.v.); at first merely derogatory, wandering, vagrant; then (1540s)
acquiring a meaning thoroughgoing, downright, notorious.


drifter (n.)

1864, as a mining term; 1883, boat fishing with drift-nets; agent noun from drift (v.). Meaning
vagrant is from 1908.


dell (n.2)

rogue's cant 16c.-17c. for a young girl of the vagrant class, of uncertain origin.    A Dell is a
yonge wenche, able for generation, and not yet knowen or broken by the vpright man. ... [W]hen they
have beene lyen with all by the vpright man then they be Doxes, and no Dells. [Thomas Harman, A
Caveat or Warning for Common Cursitors, 1567]


vagrancy (n.)

life of idle begging, 1706, from vagrant + -cy. Earlier in a figurative sense, mental wandering
(1640s). By late 18c. used in law as a catch-all for miscellaneous petty offenses against public
order.


vagabond (n.)

c.1400, earlier wagabund (in a criminal indictment from 1311); see vagabond (adj.). Despite the
earliest use, in Middle English often merely one who is without a settled home, a vagrant but not
necessarily in a bad sense. Notion of idle, disreputable person predominated from 17c.


tramp (n.)

person who wanders about, idle vagrant, vagabond, 1660s, from tramp (v). Sense of steamship which
takes cargo wherever it can be traded (as opposed to one running a regular line) is attested from
c.1880. The meaning promiscuous woman is from 1922. Sense of a long, toilsome walk is from 1786.


randy (adj.)

1690s, Scottish, aggressive, boisterous, probably from rand to rave, an obsolete variant of rant
(v.). In the original sense especially of beggars, and probably implying vagrant habits as well as
rude behavior [OED]. Sense of lewd, lustful first recorded 1847. Related: Randiness.


stroll (v.)

c.1600, a cant word introduced from the Continent, probably from dialectal German strollen, variant
of Swiss German strolchen to stroll about, loaf, from Strolch vagabond, vagrant, also fortuneteller,
perhaps from Italian astrologo astrologer. Related: Strolled; strolling.


bribe (n.)

late 14c., thing stolen, from Old French bribe bit, piece, hunk; morsel of bread given to beggars
(14c., compare Old French bribeor vagrant, beggar), from briber, brimber to beg, a general Romanic
word (Gamillscheg marks it as Rotwelsch, i.e. thieves' jargon), of uncertain origin; old sources
suggest Celtic (compare Breton breva to break). Shift of meaning to gift given to influence
corruptly is by mid-15c.


erroneous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French erroneus and directly from Latin erroneus vagrant, wandering (in Late
Latin erroneous), from erronem (nominative erro) vagabond, from errare to wander, err (see err).
Related: Erroneously.


rogue (n.)

1560s, idle vagrant, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a
begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an
agent noun in English from Latin rogare to ask. Another theory [Klein] traces it to Celtic (compare
Breton rog haughty); OED says, There is no evidence of connexion with F. rogue 'arrogant.'     In
playful or affectionate use, one who is mischievous, 1590s. Meaning large wild beast living apart
from the herd is from 1859, originally of elephants. Meaning something uncontrolled or undisciplined
is from 1964. Also common in 17c. as a verb. Rogue's gallery police collection of mug shots is
attested from 1859.


