vainglorious (adj.)

early 15c., from vainglory + -ous, or from Old French vain glorios boastful, swaggering. Related:
Vaingloriously; vaingloriousness. Groce (Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd ed., 1796)
has vain-glorious man One who boasts without reason, or, as the canters say, pisses more than he
drinks.


vain (adj.)

c.1300, devoid of real value, idle, unprofitable, from Old French vain, vein worthless, void,
invalid, feeble; conceited (12c.), from Latin vanus empty, void, figuratively idle, fruitless, from
PIE *wa-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (cognates: Old English wanian to lessen,
wan deficient; Old Norse vanta to lack; Latin vacare to be empty, vastus empty, waste; Avestan va-
lack, Persian vang empty, poor; Sanskrit una- deficient, Armenian unain empty).    Meaning
conceited, elated with a high opinion of oneself first recorded 1690s in English; earlier silly,
idle, foolish (late 14c.). Phrase in vain to no effect (c.1300, after Latin in vanum) preserves the
original sense. Related: Vainly; vainness. Compare also vainglory.


vainglory (n.)

c.1200, worthless glory, undue pomp or show, waynglori, from Old French vaine glorie, from Medieval
Latin vana gloria (see vain + glory (n.)).


vanity (n.)

c.1200, that which is vain, futile, or worthless, from Old French vanite self-conceit; futility;
lack of resolve (12c.), from Latin vanitatem (nominative vanitas) emptiness, aimlessness; falsity,
figuratively vainglory, foolish pride, from vanus empty, vain, idle (see vain). Meaning self-
conceited in English is attested from mid-14c. Vanity table is attested from 1936. Vanity Fair is
from Pilgrim's Progress (1678).


idleness (n.)

Old English idelnes frivolity, vanity, emptiness; vain existence; see idle + -ness. Old English
expressed the idea we attach to in vain by in idelnisse. Spenser, Scott, and others use idlesse to
mean the same thing in a positive, pleasant sense.


idle (adj.)

Old English idel empty, void; vain; worthless, useless; not employed, common West Germanic
(cognates: Old Saxon idal, Old Frisian idel empty, worthless, Old Dutch idil, Old High German ital,
German eitel vain, useless, mere, pure), of unknown origin. Idle threats preserves original sense;
meaning lazy is c.1300.


rodomontade (n.)

1610s (earlier rodomontado, 1590s), vain boasting like that of Rodomonte, character in Ariosto's
Orlando Furioso. In dialectal Italian the name means literally one who rolls (away) the mountain.


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


someday (adv.)

at some indefinite date in the future, 1768, from some + day.    MISS SOMEDAY.  Poor Charley wooed,
but wooed in vain,  From Monday until Sunday;  Still Cupid whisper'd to the swain  You'll conquer
Betsey Someday.     [The Port Folio, June 1816]


idle (v.)

late 15c., make vain or worthless, from idle (adj.). Meaning spend or waste (time) is from 1650s.
Meaning cause to be idle is from 1789. Sense of running slowly and steadily without transmitting
power (as a motor) first recorded 1916. Related: Idled; idling.


nil (n.)

nothing, 1833, from Latin nil, contraction of nihil, nihilum nothing, not at all; in vain, from ne-
not (see un-) + hilum small thing, trifle, of unknown origin.


want (v.)

c.1200, to be lacking, from Old Norse vanta to lack, want, earlier *wanaton, from Proto-Germanic
*wanen, from PIE *we-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (see vain). The meaning
desire, wish for, feel the need of is recorded by 1706.


vacate (v.)

1640s, to make void, to annul, from Latin vacatus, past participle of vacare be empty, be void (see
vain). Meaning to leave, give up, quit (a place) is attested from 1791. Related: Vacated; vacating.


airy (adj.)

late 14c., of the air, made of air, from air (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning breezy is attested from 1590s;
that of lively is from 1640s. Sense of vain, unsubstantial is from 1580s. Disparaging airy-fairy is
attested from 1920 (earlier in a sense of delicate or light as a fairy, which is how Tennyson used
it in 1830).


lost (adj.)

defeated, c.1300; wasted, spent in vain, c.1500; also no longer to be found (1520s), from past
participle of lose. Lost Cause in reference to the Southern U.S. bid for independence is from the
title of E.A. Pollard's history of the CSA and the rebellion (1866). Lost Generation in reference to
the period 1914-18 first attested 1926 in Hemingway's The Sun Also Rises, where he credits it to
Gertrude Stein.


ostentation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French ostentacion (mid-14c.) and directly from Latin ostentationem (nominative
ostentatio) showing, exhibition, vain display, noun of action from past participle stem of ostentare
to display, frequentative of ostendere to show (see ostensible).


superb (adj.)

1540s, noble, magnificent (of buildings, etc.), from Latin superbus grand, proud, splendid; haughty,
vain, insolent, from super above, over (see super-). The second element perhaps is from PIE root
*bhe- to be. General sense of very fine developed by 1729. Related: Superbious (c.1500); superbly.


nought (n.)

Old English nowiht nothing, variant of nawiht (see naught). Meaning zero, cipher is from early 15c.
Expression for nought in vain is late 13c. To come to nought is from 1590s.


unfavorable (adj.)

also unfavourable, mid-15c. (implied in unfavorably), from un- (1) not + favorable (adj.).    We
must not indulge in unfavorable views of mankind, since by doing it we make bad men believe that
they are no worse than others, and we teach the good that they are good in vain. [Walter Savage
Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


vaniloquence (n.)

idle talk, 1620s, from Latin vaniloquentia, from vanus idle, empty (see vain) + loquens, from loqui
to speak (see locution).


frustrate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin frustratus, past participle of frustrari to deceive, disappoint, frustrate,
from frustra (adv.) in vain, in error, related to fraus injury, harm (see fraud). Related:
Frustrated; frustrating.


vacant (adj.)

c.1300, not filled, held, or occupied, from Old French vacant idle, unoccupied (of an office, etc.),
from Latin vacantem (nominative vacans), empty, unoccupied, present participle of vacare to be empty
(see vain). Meaning characterized by absence of mental occupation is from 1570s. Related: Vacantly.


vacancy (n.)

1570s, a vacating; c.1600, state of being vacant, from Late Latin vacantia, from Latin vacans empty,
unoccupied, present participle of vacare be empty (see vain). From 1690s as a vacant office or post;
meaning available room at a hotel is recorded from 1953. Related: Vacance (1530s); vacancies.


futile (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French futile, from Latin futilis vain, worthless, futile, literally pouring out
easily (of a vessel), hence easily emptied, leaky, unreliable, from base of fundere pour, melt, from
PIE root *gheu- to pour (see found (v.2)). Related: Futilely.


pomp (n.)

c.1300, from Old French pompe pomp, magnificence (13c.) and directly from Latin pompa procession,
pomp, from Greek pompe solemn procession, display, literally a sending, from pempein to send. In
Church Latin, used in deprecatory sense for worldly display, vain show.


ungainly (adj.)

1610s, unfit, improper, from Middle English ungeinliche, from ungein (late 14c.) inconvenient,
disagreeable, troublesome, from un- (1) not + gein kind, helpful; reliable; beneficial; suitable,
appropriate; convenient, from Old Norse gegn straight, direct, helpful, from Proto-Germanic *gagina
against (see again). Old English had ung&aelig;nge useless, vain.


Sparta

capital of Laconia in ancient Greece, famed for severity of its social order, the frugality of its
people, the valor of its arms, and the brevity of its speech. Also for dirty boys, men vain of their
long hair, boxing girls, iron money, and insufferable black broth. The name is said to be from Greek
sparte cord made from spartos, a type of broom, from PIE *spr-to-, from root *sper- (2) to turn,
twist (see spiral (adj.)). Perhaps the reference is to the cords laid as foundation markers for the
city. Or the whole thing could be folk etymology.


wane (v.)

Old English wanian make or become smaller gradually, diminish, decline, fade, from Proto-Germanic
*wanen (cognates: Old Saxon wanon, Old Norse vana, Old Frisian wania, Middle Dutch waenen, Old High
German wanon to wane, to grow less), from *wano- lacking, from PIE *we-no-, from root *eue- to
leave, abandon, give out (see vain). Related: Waned; waning; wanes.


vaunt (v.)

early 15c., speak vainly or proudly, from Anglo-French vaunter, Old French vanter to praise, speak
highly of, from Medieval Latin vanitare to boast, frequentative of Latin vanare to utter empty
words, from vanus idle, empty (see vain). Also short for avaunten to boast (see vaunt (n.)).
Related: Vaunted; vaunting.


puppy (n.)

late 15c., woman's small pet dog, of uncertain origin but likely from Middle French poup&eacute;e
doll, toy (see puppet). Meaning shifted from toy dog to young dog (1590s), replacing Middle English
whelp. In early use in English puppet and puppy were not always distinct from each other. Also used
about that time in sense of vain young man. Puppy-dog first attested 1590s (in Shakespeare, puppi-
dogges). Puppy love is from 1823. Puppy fat is from 1937.


vanish (v.)

disappear quickly, c.1300, from shortened form of esvaniss-, stem of Old French esvanir disappear;
cause to disappear, from Vulgar Latin *exvanire, from Latin evanescere disappear, pass away, die
out, from ex- out (see ex-) + vanescere vanish, inchoative verb from vanus empty (see vain).
Related: Vanished; vanishing; vanishingly. Vanishing point in perspective drawing is recorded from
1797.


-less

word-forming element meaning lacking, cannot be, does not, from Old English -leas, from leas free
(from), devoid (of), false, feigned, from Proto-Germanic *lausaz (cognates: Dutch -loos, German -los
-less, Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant, dissolute, Middle Dutch los, German los loose, free,
Gothic laus empty, vain). Related to loose and lease.


Listerine (n.)

1879, American English, formulated by Dr. Joseph Lawrence and Jordan Wheat Lambert as a multi-
purpose disinfectant and anti-septic for surgery. In 1895, after it was discovered to kill germs
commonly found in the mouth, the Lambert Company started marketing it as an oral antiseptic. Named
for Joseph Lord Lister (1827-1912), F.R.S., O.M., English surgeon, who revolutionized modern surgery
by applying Pasteur's discoveries and performing the first ever antiseptic surgery in 1865. Lister
objected in vain to the use of his name on the product. Lister (attested from 1286, an Anglian
surname) is from Middle English lit(t)e to dye (see litmus) + fem. suffix -ster, hence, a dyer.


vacation (n.)

late 14c., freedom from obligations, leisure, release (from some activity or occupation), from Old
French vacacion vacancy, vacant position (14c.) and directly from Latin vacationem (nominative
vacatio) leisure, freedom, exemption, a being free from duty, immunity earned by service, noun of
state from past participle stem of vacare be empty, free, or at leisure (see vain).    Meanings
state of being unoccupied, process of vacating in English are early 15c. Meaning formal suspension
of activity, time in which there is an intermission of usual employment (in reference to schools,
courts, etc.) is recorded from mid-15c. As the U.S. equivalent of what in Britain is called a
holiday, it is attested from 1878.


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


popinjay (n.)

late 13c., a parrot, from Old French papegai (12c.), from Spanish papagayo, from Arabic babagha',
Persian babgha parrot, possibly formed in an African or other non-Indo-European language and
imitative of its cry. Ending probably assimilated in Western European languages to jay words (Old
French jai, etc.).    Used of people in a complimentary sense (in allusion to beauty and rarity)
from early 14c.; meaning vain, talkative person is first recorded 1520s. Obsolete figurative sense
of a target to shoot at is explained by Cotgrave's 2nd sense definition: also a woodden parrot (set
up on the top of a steeple, high tree, or pole) whereat there is, in many parts of France, a
generall shooting once euerie yeare; and an exemption, for all that yeare, from La Taille, obtained
by him that strikes downe all or part of the bird.


nance (n.)

effeminate man, homosexual, 1904, from female name Nancy (q.v.), which was in use as an adjective
meaning effeminate (applied to men) from 1883, a shortening of earlier Miss Nancy.   <b>Nancy,
Miss,</b> an opprobrious epithet for an exceedingly effeminate, over-nice young man. The original
Miss Nancy, however, was a Mrs. Anna Old field, a celebrated actress, who died in 1730 and was
buried in Westminster Abbey. She was extremely vain and nice about her dress, and as she lay in
state, attended by two noblemen, she was attired, as she had directed shortly before her death, in a
very fine Brussels lace head-dress, a Holland shift with a tucker and double ruffles of the same
lace, a pair of new kid gloves, etc., a circumstance alluded to by Pope .... [William S. Walsh,
Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, 1892]   Nancy boy effeminate male homosexual is attested by
1958.


vacuum (n.)

1540s, emptiness of space, from Latin vacuum an empty space, vacant place, a void, noun use of
neuter of vacuus empty, unoccupied, devoid of, figuratively free, unoccupied, related to vacare be
empty (see vain). Properly a loan-translation of Greek kenon, literally that which is empty. Meaning
a space emptied of air is attested from 1650s. Vacuum tube glass thermionic device is attested from
1859. Vacuum cleaner is from 1903; shortened form vacuum (n.) first recorded 1910.    The
metaphysicians of Elea, Parmenides and Melissus, started the notion that a vacuum was impossible,
and this became a favorite doctrine with Aristotle. All the scholastics upheld the maxim that nature
abhors a vacuum. [Century Dictionary]


waste (v.)

c.1200, devastate, ravage, ruin, from Anglo-French and Old North French waster to waste, squander,
spoil, ruin (Old French gaster; Modern French g&#226;ter), altered (by influence of Frankish
*wostjan) from Latin vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate, waste (see vain). Related:
wasted; wasting.    The Germanic word also existed in Old English as westan to lay waste, ravage.
Spanish gastar, Italian guastare also are from Germanic. Meaning to lose strength or health; pine;
weaken is attested from c.1300; the sense of squander, spend or consume uselessly is first recorded
mid-14c.; meaning to kill is from 1964. Waste not, want not attested from 1778.


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


V

In Middle English, -u- and -v- were used interchangeably, though with a preference for v- as the
initial letter (vnder, vain, etc.) and -u- elsewhere (full, euer, etc.). The distinction into
consonant and vowel identities was established in English by 1630, under influence of continental
printers, but into 19c. some dictionaries and other catalogues continued to list -u- and -v- words
as a single series.    No native Anglo-Saxon words begin in v- except those (vane, vat, vixen)
altered by the southwestern England habit of replacing initial f- with v- (and initial s- with z-).
Confusion of -v- and -w- also was a characteristic of 16c. Cockney accents.    As a Roman numeral,
five. In German rocket weapons systems of World War II, it stood for Vergeltungswaffe reprisal
weapon. V-eight as a type of motor engine is recorded from 1929 (V-engine is attested from 1909), so
called for the arrangement. The V for victory hand sign was conceived January 1941 by Belgian
politician and resistance leader Victor de Laveleye, to signify French victoire and Flemish vrijheid
(freedom). It was broadcast into Europe by Radio Belgi&#235;/Radio Belgique and popularized by the
BBC by June 1941, from which time it became a universal allied gesture.


loose (adj.)

early 13c., not securely fixed; c.1300, unbound, from Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant,
dissolute, cognate with Old English leas devoid of, false, feigned, incorrect, from Proto-Germanic
*lausaz (cognates: Danish l&oslash;s loose, untied, Swedish l&#246;s loose, movable, detached,
Middle Dutch, German los loose, free, Gothic laus empty, vain), from PIE *leu- to loosen, divide,
cut apart (see lose). Meaning not clinging, slack is mid-15c. Meaning not bundled is late 15c. Sense
of unchaste, immoral is recorded from late 15c. Meaning at liberty, free from obligation is 1550s.
Sense of rambling, disconnected is from 1680s. Figurative sense of loose cannon was in use by 1896,
probably from celebrated image in a popular story by Hugo:    You can reason with a bull dog,
astonish a bull, fascinate a boa, frighten a tiger, soften a lion; no resource with such a monster
as a loose cannon. You cannot kill it, it is dead; and at the same time it lives. It lives with a
sinister life which comes from the infinite. It is moved by the ship, which is moved by the sea,
which is moved by the wind. This exterminator is a plaything. [Victor Hugo, Ninety Three]   Loose
end in reference to something unfinished, undecided, unguarded is from 1540s; to be at loose ends is
from 1807. Phrase on the loose free, unrestrained is from 1749 (upon the loose).


spell (v.1)

early 14c., read letter by letter, write or say the letters of; c.1400, form words by means of
letters, apparently a French word that merged with or displaced a native Old English one; both are
from the same Germanic root, but the French word had evolved a different sense. The native word is
Old English spellian to tell, speak, discourse, talk, from Proto-Germanic *spellam (cognates: Old
High German spellon to tell, Old Norse spjalla, Gothic spillon to talk, tell), from PIE *spel- (2)
to say aloud, recite.    But the current senses seem to come from Anglo-French espeller, Old French
espelir mean, signify, explain, interpret, also spell out letters, pronounce, recite, from Frankish
*spellon to tell or some other Germanic source, ultimately identical with the native word.
Related: Spelled; spelling. In early Middle English still to speak, preach, talk, tell, hence such
expressions as hear spell hear (something) told or talked about, spell the wind talk in vain (both
15c.). Meaning form words with proper letters is from 1580s. Spell out explain step-by-step is first
recorded 1940, American English. Shakespeare has spell (someone) backwards reverse the character of,
explain in a contrary sense, portray with determined negativity.


butterfly (n.)

Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but of obscure signification. Perhaps
based on the old notion that the insects (or witches disguised as butterflies) consume butter or
milk that is left uncovered. Or, less creatively, simply because the pale yellow color of many
species' wings suggests the color of butter. Another theory connects it to the color of the insect's
excrement, based on Dutch cognate boterschijte. An overview of words for butterfly in various
languages can be found here. Also see papillon.    Applied to persons from c.1600, originally in
reference to vain and gaudy attire; by 1806 in reference to transformation from early lowly state;
in reference to flitting tendencies by 1873. The swimming stroke so called from 1936. Butterflies
light stomach spasms caused by anxiety is from 1908.    The butterfly effect is a deceptively simple
insight extracted from a complex modern field. As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's
department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer program to simulate
weather. One day he changed one of a dozen numbers representing atmospheric conditions, from .506127
to .506. That tiny alteration utterly transformed his long-term forecast, a point Lorenz amplified
in his 1972 paper, Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado
in Texas? [Peter Dizikes, The Meaning of the Butterfly, The Boston Globe, June 8, 2008]


mad (adj.)

late 13c., from Old English gem&aelig;dde (plural) out of one's mind (usually implying also violent
excitement), also foolish, extremely stupid, earlier gem&aelig;ded rendered insane, past participle
of a lost verb *gem&aelig;dan to make insane or foolish, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maid-jan,
demonstrative form of *ga-maid-az changed (for the worse), abnormal (cognates: Old Saxon gimed
foolish, Old High German gimeit foolish, vain, boastful, Gothic gamai&thorn;s crippled, wounded, Old
Norse mei&eth;a to hurt, maim), from intensive prefix *ga- + PIE *moito-, past participle of root
*mei- (1) to change (cognates: Latin mutare to change, mutuus done in exchange, migrare to change
one's place of residence; see mutable).    Emerged in Middle English to replace the more usual Old
English word, wod (see wood (adj.)). Sense of beside oneself with excitement or enthusiasm is from
early 14c. Meaning beside oneself with anger is attested from early 14c., but deplored by Rev. John
Witherspoon (1781) as an Americanism. It now competes in American English with angry for this sense.
Of animals, affected with rabies, from late 13c. Phrase mad as a March hare is attested from 1520s,
via notion of breeding season; mad as a hatter is from 1829 as demented, 1837 as enraged, according
to a modern theory supposedly from erratic behavior caused by prolonged exposure to poison mercuric
nitrate, used in making felt hats. For mad as a wet hen see hen. Mad money is attested from 1922;
mad scientist is from 1891.


