valor (n.)

c.1300, value, worth, from Old French valor, valour valor, moral worth, merit, courage, virtue
(12c.), from Late Latin valorem (nominative valor) value, worth (in Medieval Latin strength, valor),
from stem of Latin valere be strong, be worth (see valiant). The meaning courage is first recorded
1580s, from Italian valore, from the same Late Latin word. (The Middle English word also had a sense
of worth or worthiness in respect of manly qualities).


valorization (n.)

1906, from valor value (late 15c.), variant of valour (see valor).


valorize (v.)

1908, from valor (see valorization) + -ize.


valorous (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French valeureux, from valeur (see valor). Related: Valorously; valorousness.


Farrell

Irish surname, from Irish Fearghail man of valor.


valour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of valor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


valiance (n.)

valiant character (obsolete or archaic), mid-15c., earlier vailance (late 14c.), from Anglo-French
vaillaunce, valiauns (c.1300) or Old French vaillance value, price; merit, worth; virtue, fine
qualities; courage, valor (12c.), from Old French valiant (see valiant).


ad valorem

type of customs duties, 1711, Modern Latin, (in proportion) to the value, from ad to (see ad-) +
Late Latin valorem, accusative of valor value (see value (n.)).


Sparta

capital of Laconia in ancient Greece, famed for severity of its social order, the frugality of its
people, the valor of its arms, and the brevity of its speech. Also for dirty boys, men vain of their
long hair, boxing girls, iron money, and insufferable black broth. The name is said to be from Greek
sparte cord made from spartos, a type of broom, from PIE *spr-to-, from root *sper- (2) to turn,
twist (see spiral (adj.)). Perhaps the reference is to the cords laid as foundation markers for the
city. Or the whole thing could be folk etymology.


chivalry (n.)

c.1300, body or host of knights; knighthood in the feudal social system; bravery in war, warfare as
an art, from Old French chevalerie knighthood, chivalry, nobility, cavalry, art of war, from
chevaler knight, from Medieval Latin caballarius horseman, from Latin caballus nag, pack-horse (see
cavalier). From late 14c. as the nobility as one of the estates of the realm, also as the word for
an ethical code emphasizing honor, valor, generosity and courtly manners. Modern use for social and
moral code of medieval feudalism probably is an 18c. historical revival.


virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


