vampire (n.)

spectral being in a human body who maintains semblance of life by leaving the grave at night to suck
the warm blood of the living as they sleep, 1734, from French vampire (18c.) or German Vampir (1732,
in an account of Hungarian vampires), from Hungarian vampir, from Old Church Slavonic opiri
(cognates: Serbian vampir, Bulgarian vapir, Ukrainian uper), said by Slavic linguist Franc
Miklo&#353;i&#269; to be ultimtely from Kazan Tatar ubyr witch, but Max Vasmer, an expert in this
linguistic area, finds that phonetically doubtful. An Eastern European creature popularized in
English by late 19c. gothic novels, however there are scattered English accounts of night-walking,
blood-gorged, plague-spreading undead corpses from as far back as 1196. Figurative sense of person
who preys on others is from 1741. Applied 1774 by French biologist Buffon to a species of South
American blood-sucking bat. Related: Vampiric.


vamp (n.2)

seductive woman who exploits men, 1911, short for vampire. First attested use is earlier than the
release of the Fox film A Fool There Was (January 1915), with sultry Theda Bara in the role of The
Vampire. The movie was based on a play of that name that had been on Broadway in 1909 (title and
concept from a Kipling poem, The Vampire, inspired by a Burne-Jones painting). The stage lead seems
to have been played by Kathryn Kaelred and Bernice Golden Henderson. At any rate, Bara (born
Theodosia Goodman) remains the classic vamp and the word's wide currency is attributable to her
performance.    A fool there was and he made his prayer       (Even as you and I!)  To a rag and a
bone and a hank of hair       (We called her the woman who did not care)  But the fool, he called
her his lady fair       (Even as you and I.)  [Kipling, The Vampire]


Dracula (n.)

the vampire, from in Bram Stoker's novel (1897). It was a surname of Prince Vlad II of Wallachia
(d.1476), and means in Romanian son of Dracul, literally the dragon, from the name and emblem taken
by Vlad's father, also named Vlad, c.1431 when he joined the Order of the Dragon, founded 1418 by
Sigismund the Glorious of Hungary to defend the Christian religion from the Turks and crush heretics
and schismatics.


vampirism (n.)

1737, from vampire + -ism.


lamia (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lamia, from Greek lamia female vampire, literally swallower, lecher, from
laimos throat, gullet. Probably cognate with Latin lemures spirits of the dead (see lemur). Used in
early translations of the Bible for screech owls and sea monsters. Sometimes also, apparently,
mermaids.    Also kynde erre&thorn; in som beestes wondirliche j-schape, as it fare&thorn; in a
beest &thorn;at hatte lamia, &thorn;at ha&thorn; an heed as a mayde &amp; body as a grym fissche[;]
whan &thorn;at best lamya may fynde ony man, first a flatere&thorn; wi&thorn; hym with a wommannes
face and make&thorn; hym ligge by here while he may dure, &amp; whanne he may nofer&thorn;ere
suffice to here lecherye &thorn;anne he rende&thorn; hym and sle&thorn; and ete&thorn; hym. [John of
Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


