vanguard (n.)

mid-15c., vaunt garde, from Middle French avant-garde, from avant in front (see avant) + garde guard
(see guard (n.)). Communist revolutionary sense is recorded from 1928.


van (n.1)

front part of an army or other advancing group, c.1600, shortening of vanguard.


al Qaida

also Al-Qaeda; name of a loosely structured jihadist movement founded c.1989 by Osama bin Laden;
from Arabic, literally the base. A common Arabic term among Muslim radicals from the wider Islamic
world who came to Afghanistan in 1980s and fought alongside local rebels against the Soviets, and
who regarded themselves and their struggle not merely in Afghan terms but as the base or foundation
of a wider jihad and revival in Islam. Used by Bin Laden's mentor, Abdallah Azzam (1941-1989), who
referred to the vanguard which constitutes the strong foundation [al-qaida al-sulbah] for the
expected society. In U.S., the term first turns up in a CIA report in 1996.    Every Muslim, from
the moment they realise the distinction in their hearts, hates Americans, hates Jews, and hates
Christians. This is a part of our belief and our religion. For as long as I can remember, I have
felt tormented and at war, and have felt hatred and animosity for Americans. [Osama bin Laden,
interview aired on Al-Jazeera, December 1998]


sputnik (n.)

artificial satellite, extended from the name of the one launched by the Soviet Union Oct. 4, 1957,
from Russian sputnik satellite, literally traveling companion (in this use short for sputnik zemlyi,
traveling companion of the Earth) from Old Church Slavonic supotiniku, from Russian so-, s- with,
together + put' path, way, from Old Church Slavonic poti, from PIE *pent- to tread, go (see find
(v.)) + agent suffix -nik.    The electrifying impact of the launch on the West can be gauged by the
number of new formations in -nik around this time (the suffix had been present in a Yiddish context
for at least a decade before); Laika, the stray dog launched aboard Sputnik 2 (Nov. 2, 1957), which
was dubbed muttnik in the Detroit Free Press, etc. The rival U.S. satellite which failed to reach
orbit in 1957 (because the Vanguard rocket blew up on the launch pad) derided as a kaputnik (in the
Daytona Beach Morning Journal), a dudnik (Christian Science Monitor), a flopnik (Youngstown
Vindicator, New York Times), a pffftnik (National Review), and a stayputnik (Vancouver Sun).


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


