sheldrake (n.)

early 14c., from sheld- variegated + drake male duck. First element cognate with Middle Dutch
schillede separated, variegated, West Flemish schilde, from schillen (Dutch verschillen to make
different), from Proto-Germanic *skeli-, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut (see scale (n.1)). This
is the origin considered most likely, though English sheld by itself is a dialect word attested only
from c.1500. OED finds derivation from  shield (n.), on resemblance to the patterns on shields,
improbable.


paint (v.)

early 13c., represent in painting or drawing, portray; early 14c., paint the surface of, color,
stain; from Old French peintier to paint, from peint, past participle of peindre to paint, from
Latin pingere to paint, represent in a picture, stain; embroider, tattoo, from PIE root *peig- (1),
also *peik- to cut (cognates: Sanskrit pimsati hews out, cuts, carves, adorns, Old Church Slavonic
pila file, saw, Lithuanian pela file).    Sense evolution between PIE and Latin was, presumably,
from decorate with cut marks to decorate to decorate with color. Compare Sanskrit pingah reddish,
pesalah adorned, decorated, lovely, Old Church Slavonic pegu variegated; Greek poikilos variegated;
Old High German fehjan to adorn; Old Church Slavonic pisati, Lithuanian piesiu to write. Probably
also representing the cutting branch of the family is Old English feol (see file (n.)).    To paint
the town (red) go on a spree first recorded 1884; to paint (someone or something) black represent it
as wicked or evil is from 1590s. Adjective paint-by-numbers simple is attested by 1970; the art-for-
beginners kits themselves date to c.1953.


sarong (n.)

skirt-like garment, the Malay national garment, 1834, from Malay sarung sheath, covering. OED traces
it to some mod. form of Skr. saranga variegated.


variegate (v.)

1650s give variety to, from Late Latin variegatus made of various sorts or colors, past participle
of variegare diversify with different colors, from varius spotted, changing, varying (see vary) +
root of agere to drive (see act). Meaning mark with different colors is from 1660s (implied in
Variegated). Related: vareiegating.


cheetah (n.)

1704, from Hindi chita leopard, from Sanskrit chitraka hunting leopard, tiger, literally speckled,
from chitra-s distinctively marked, variegated, many-colored, bright, clear (from PIE *kit-ro-, from
root *(s)kai- (1) bright, shining; see shine (v.)) + kayah body, from PIE *kwei- to build, make (see
poet).


Krishna

eighth avatar of Vishnu, 1875, from Sanskrit krshnah, literally the Black One, from PIE *kers-no-,
suffixed form of root *kers- dark, dirty (cognates: Old Church Slavonic crunu, Russian coron, Serbo-
Croatian crn, Czech cerny, Old Prussian krisnas black, Lithuanian kersas black and white,
variegated).


perch (n.2)

spiny-finned freshwater fish, c.1300, from Old French perche, from Latin perca perch, from Greek
perke a perch, from PIE root *perk- speckled, spotted (cognates: Sanskrit prsnih speckled,
variegated; Greek perknos dark-colored, perkazein to become dark), typically in names of animals.


