vassal (n.)

early 14c. (c.1200 as a surname) tenant who pledges fealty to a lord, from Old French vassal
subject, subordinate, servant (12c.), from Medieval Latin vassallus manservant, domestic, retainer,
extended from vassus servant, from Old Celtic *wasso- young man, squire (cognates: Welsh gwas youth,
servant, Breton goaz servant, vassal, man, Irish foss servant). The adjective is recorded from
1580s.


vassalage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French vassalage, vasselage the service of a vassal, from vassal (see vassal).


varlet (n.)

mid-15c., servant, attendant of a knight, from Middle French varlet (14c.), variant of vaslet,
originally squire, young man, from Old French vassal (see vassal). The meaning rascal, rogue is
1540s.


liege (adj.)

word used by a vassal to address his superior or lord in the feudal system, c.1300, from Anglo-
French lige (late 13c.), Old French lige (feudal) liege, free, giving or receiving fidelity, perhaps
from Late Latin laeticus cultivated by serfs, from laetus serf, which probably is from Proto-
Germanic *lethiga- freed (cognates: Old English l&aelig;t half-freedman, serf; Old High German laz,
Old Frisian lethar freedman), from PIE root *le- let go, slacken (see let (v.)). Or the Middle
English word may be directly from Old High German leidig free. As a noun from late 14c., both as
vassal and lord. Hence, liege-man a vassal sworn to the service and support of a lord, who in turn
is obliged to protect him (mid-14c.).


fealty (n.)

c.1300, from Old French feaut&eacute; loyalty, fidelity; homage sworn by a vassal to his overlord;
faithfulness, from Latin fidelitatem (nominative fidelitas) fidelity, from fidelis loyal, faithful
(see fidelity).


droit du seigneur (n.)

1784, alleged medieval custom whereby the feudal lord had the right to have sex with the bride of
his vassal on their wedding night before she went to her husband, from French, literally the lord's
right. There is little evidence that it actually existed; it seems to have been invented in
imagination 16c. or 17c. The Latin form was jus primae noctis, law of the first night. For French
droit, see right (adj.2).


ambassador (n.)

late 14c., also embassador, from Middle French ambassadeur, from Old French embassator, via
Proven&ccedil;al or Old Spanish from Latin ambactus a servant, vassal, from Celtic amb(i)actos a
messenger, servant, from PIE *ambhi- about (see ambi-) + *ag- drive, lead (see act (v.)). Compare
embassy. Forms in am- and em- were used indiscriminately 17c.-18c.


serf (n.)

late 15c., servant, serving-man, slave, from Old French serf vassal, servant, slave (12c.), from
Latin servum (nominative servus) slave (see serve). Fallen from use in original sense by 18c.
Meaning lowest class of cultivators of the soil in continental European countries is from 1610s. Use
by modern writers with reference to medieval Europeans first recorded 1761 (contemporary Anglo-Latin
records used nativus, villanus, or servus).


embassy (n.)

1570s, position of an ambassador, from Middle French embassee mission, charge, office of ambassador,
Old French ambassee, from Italian ambasciata, from Old Proven&ccedil;al ambaisada office of
ambassador, from Gaulish *ambactos dependant, vassal, literally one going around, from PIE *amb(i
)-ag-to, from *ambi- (see ambi-) + *ambi- around (see ambi-) + *ag- to drive, move (see act (n.)).
Meaning official residence and retinue of an ambassador is from 1764. In earlier use were embassade
(late 15c.), ambassade (early 15c.).


valet (n.)

personal man-servant, mid-14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French valet, variant of vaslet
man's servant, workman's assistant, originally squire, young man, youth of noble birth (12c.), from
Gallo-Roman *vassellittus young nobleman, squire, page, diminutive of Medieval Latin vassallus, from
vassus servant (see vassal). Modern sense is usually short for valet de chambre; the general sense
of male household servant of the meaner sort going with the variant form varlet. First recorded use
of valet parking is from 1959.


seduce (v.)

1520s, to persuade a vassal, etc., to desert his allegiance or service, from Latin seducere lead
away, lead astray, from se- aside, away (see secret (n.)) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sexual
sense, now the prevailing one, is attested from 1550s and apparently was not in Latin. Originally
entice (a woman) to a surrender of chastity. Related: Seduced; seducing.    Replaced Middle English
seduisen (late 15c.), from Middle French s&eacute;duire seduce, from Old French suduire to corrupt,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, withdraw, remove (see subduce).


bachelor (n.)

c.1300, young man; also youthful knight, novice in arms, from Old French bacheler, bachelor,
bachelier (11c.) knight bachelor, a young squire in training for knighthood, also young man;
unmarried man, and as a university title, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin
baccalarius vassal farmer, adult serf without a landholding, one who helps or tends a baccalaria
field or land in the lord's demesne (according to old French sources, perhaps from an alteration of
vacca a cow and originally grazing land [Kitchin]). Or from Latin baculum a stick, because the
squire would practice with a staff, not a sword. Perhaps several independent words have become
confused in form [Century Dictionary]. Meaning in English expanded early 14c. to young unmarried
man, late 14c. to one who has taken the lowest degree in a university. Bachelor party as a pre-
wedding ritual is from 1882.


knight (n.)

Old English cniht boy, youth; servant, attendant, common West Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian
kniucht, Dutch knecht, Middle High German kneht boy, youth, lad, German Knecht servant, bondman,
vassal), of unknown origin. The plural in Middle English sometimes was knighten. Meaning military
follower of a king or other superior is from c.1100. Began to be used in a specific military sense
in Hundred Years War, and gradually rose in importance until it became a rank in the nobility 16c.
The chess piece so called from mid-15c. Knight in shining armor in figurative sense is from 1917,
from the man who rescues the damsel in distress in romantic dramas (perhaps especially Lohengrin).
Knights of Columbus, society of Catholic men, founded 1882 in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S.; Knights
of Labor, trade union association, founded in Philadelphia, 1869; Knights of Pythias, secret order,
founded in Washington, 1864.


thane (n.)

Old English &thorn;egn military follower, one who holds lands in exchange for military service, also
vassal, retainer, attendant, from Proto-Germanic *thegnas (cognates: Old Saxon thegan follower,
warrior, boy, Old Norse &thorn;egn thane, freeman, Old High German thegan, German Degen thane,
warrior, hero), from PIE *tek-no- (cognates: Sanskrit takman descendant, child, Greek teknon child),
from root *tek- to beget, give birth to (cognates: Greek tekos child, the young of animals, tokos
childbirth, offspring, produce of money, interest). Also used in Old English for disciple of Christ.
Specific sense of man who ranks between an earl and a freeman is late 15c.    The modern spelling is
from Scottish, where early 13c. it came to mean chief of a clan, king's baron, and it has
predominated in English probably due to the influence of Macbeth; normal orthographic changes from
Old English &eth;egn would have produced Modern English *thain. Some historians now use thegn to
distinguish Anglo-Saxon thanes from Scottish thanes.


sergeant (n.)

c.1200, servant, from Old French sergent, serjant (domestic) servant, valet; court official;
soldier, from Medieval Latin servientum (nominative serviens) servant, vassal, soldier (in Late
Latin public official), from Latin servientem serving, present participle of servire to serve (see
serve (v.)); cognate with Spanish sirviente, Italian servente; a twin of servant, and 16c. writers
sometimes use the two words interchangeably.    Specific sense of military servant is attested from
late 13c.; that of officer whose duty is to enforce judgments of a tribunal or legislative body is
from c.1300 (sergeant at arms is attested from late 14c.). Meaning non-commissioned military officer
first recorded 1540s. Originally a much more important rank than presently. As a police rank, in
Great Britain from 1839.    Middle English alternative spelling serjeant (from Old French) was
retained in Britain in special use as title of a superior order of barristers (c.1300, from legal
Latin serviens ad legem, one who serves (the king) in matters of law), from which Common Law judges
were chosen; also used of certain other officers of the royal household. sergeant-major is from
1570s. The sergeant-fish (1871) so-called for lateral markings resembling a sergeant's stripes.
Related: Sergeancy.


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


