veer (v.)

1580s, to change direction (originally of the wind; 1610s of a ship), from Middle French virer to
turn (12c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps (Diez) from the Latin stem vir- in viriae (plural)
bracelets. Gamillscheg finds von Wartburg's derivation of it from a Vulgar Latin contraction of
Latin vibrare to shake to be nicht m&#246;glich. Related: veered, veering.


peel out (v.)

hot-rodders' slang, 1952, perhaps from peel blade or wash of an oar (1875, American English),
earlier shovel-shaped instrument (see peel (n.2). Or it might be from aircraft pilot phrase peel off
veer away from formation (World War II), or from earlier American English slang peel it run away at
full speed (1860).


environ (v.)

late 14c. (implied in environing), to surround, from Old French environer to surround, enclose,
encircle, from environ round about, from en- in (see en- (1)) + viron circle, circuit, from virer to
turn (see veer). Related: Environed.


shake (v.)

Old English sceacan move (something) quickly to and fro, brandish; move the body or a part of it
rapidly back and forth; also go, glide, hasten, flee, depart (related to sceacdom flight); of
persons or parts of the body, to tremble especially from fever, cold, fear (class VI strong verb;
past tense scoc, past participle scacen), from Proto-Germanic *skakanan (cognates: Old Norse,
Swedish skaka, Danish skage to shift, turn, veer). No certain cognates outside Germanic, but some
suggest a possible connection to Sanskrit khaj to agitate, churn, stir about, Old Church Slavonic
skoku a leap, bound, Welsh ysgogi move.    Of the earth in earthquakes, c.1300. Meaning seize and
shake (someone or something else) is from early 14c. In reference to mixing ingredients, etc., by
shaking a container from late 14c. Meaning to rid oneself of by abrupt twists is from c.1200, also
in Middle English in reference to evading responsibility, etc. Meaning weaken, impair is from late
14c., on notion of make unstable.    To shake hands dates from 1530s. Shake a (loose) leg hurry up
first recorded 1904; shake a heel (sometimes foot) was an old way to say to dance (1660s); to shake
(one's) elbow (1620s) meant to gamble at dice. Phrase more _____ than you can shake a stick at is
attested from 1818, American English. To shake (one's) head as a sign of disapproval is recorded
from c.1300.


