vehement (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French vehement, veement impetuous, ardent (12c.), from Latin vehementem
(nominative vehemens) impetuous, eager, violent, furious, ardent, carried away, perhaps [Barnhart]
from a lost present middle participle of vehere to carry (see vehicle). The other theory is that it
represents vehe- lacking, wanting + mens mind. Related: Vehemently.


blazing (adj.)

late 14c., shining, also vehement, present participle adjective from blaze (v.1). As a mild or
euphemistic epithet, attested from 1888 (no doubt connected with the blazes in colloquial sense of
Hell).


asseveration (n.)

1550s, from Latin asseverationem (nominative asseveratio) vehement assertion, protestation, noun of
action from past participle stem of asseverare (see asseverate).


fervid (adj.)

1590s, from Latin fervidus glowing, burning; vehement, fervid, from fervere to boil, glow (see brew
(v.)). Figurative sense of impassioned is from 1650s. Related: Fervidly.


vehemence (n.)

c.1400, from Old French vehemence, veemence forcefulness, violence, rashness or directly from Latin
vehementia eagerness, strength, from stem of vehere (see vehement). Related: Vehemency.


violence (n.)

late 13c., physical force used to inflict injury or damage, from Anglo-French and Old French
violence (13c.), from Latin violentia vehemence, impetuosity, from violentus vehement, forcible,
probably related to violare (see violation). Weakened sense of improper treatment is attested from
1590s.


haste (n.)

early 13c., from Old French haste haste, urgency, hastiness (12c., Modern French h&acirc;te), from
Frankish *haifst violence, from Proto-Germanic *haifstiz (cognates: Gothic haifsts strife, Old
English h&aelig;ste violent, vehement, impetuous). To make haste is recorded by 1530s.


thirst (n.)

Old English &thorn;urst, from Proto-Germanic *thurstu- (cognates: Old Saxon thurst, Frisian torst,
Dutch dorst, Old High German and German durst), from Proto-Germanic verbal stem *thurs- (cognates:
Gothic thaursjan, Old English thyrre), from PIE root *ters- dry (see terrain). Figurative sense of
vehement desire is attested from c.1200.


tirade (n.)

a long, vehement speech, a 'volley of words,'  1801, from French tirade a volley, a shot; a pull; a
long speech or passage; a drawing out (16c.), from tirer draw out, endure, suffer, or the French
noun is perhaps from or influenced by cognate Italian tirata a volley, from past participle of
tirare to draw. The whole Romanic word group is of uncertain origin. Barnhart suggests it is a
shortening of the source of Old French martirer endure martyrdom (see martyr).


flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


