velocity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin velocitatem (nominative velocitas) swiftness, speed, from velox (genitive
velocis) swift, speedy, rapid, quick, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to vehere carry (see
vehicle), or from the same root as vigil.


Beaufort scale

to measure wind velocity, developed 1806 by Francis Beaufort (1774-1857), surveyor and hydrologist.


Heisenberg

in reference to German physicist Werner Heisenberg (1901-1976), pioneer of quantum mechanics. His
uncertainty principle (deduced in 1927) is that an electron may have a determinate position, or a
determinate velocity, but not both.


tacho-

word-forming element meaning speed, from Latinized form of Greek takho-, comb. form of takhos speed,
swiftness, fleetness, velocity, related to takhys swift, of unknown origin.


rapidity (n.)

1650s, from French rapidit&#233; and directly from Latin rapiditatem (nominative rapiditas)
swiftness, rapidity, velocity, from rapidus hasty, swift, rapid (see rapid).


velociraptor (n.)

1924, from Latin velox (genitive velocis) swift, speedy (see velocity) + raptor robber (see raptor).
Fossil remains discovered in 1923 in the red Djadochta sandstone at Shabarakh Usu in Mongolia.
The first (Fig. 1) of the typical megalosaurian type, although of small size, seems to have been an
alert, swift-moving carnivorous dinosaur to which the generic name Velociraptor is applied. [Henry
Fairfield Osborn, Three New Therapoda, Protoceratops Zone, Central Mongolia, in American Museum
Novitates, Nov., 7, 1924]


vegetable (adj.)

early 15c., capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous; also neither animal nor mineral, of the
plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant, from Old French vegetable living, fit to live, and
directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis growing, flourishing, from Late Latin vegetabilis
animating, enlivening, from Latin vegetare to enliven, from vegetus vigorous, enlivened, active,
sprightly, from vegere to be alive, active, to quicken, from PIE *weg- (2) be strong, lively, source
of watch (v.), vigor, velocity, and possibly witch (see wake (v.)). The meaning resembling that of a
vegetable, dull, uneventful; having life such as a plant has is attested from 1854 (see vegetable
(n.)).


velocipede (n.)

1819, wheeled vehicle propelled by alternate thrusts of each foot on the ground, 1819, from French
v&eacute;locip&egrave;de (19c.), from Latin velox (genitive velocis) swift, speedy (see velocity) +
pedem, accusative of pes foot (see foot (n.)). The mechanical ancestor of the bicycle, it was
tinkered with and improved; the name continued for some time and was applied to an early kind of
modern bicycle or tricycle from 1849. See bicycle (n.).    The Velocipede has been introduced into
England, under letters patent, by Mr. Johnson, a coachmaker in Long-Acre, by whom it has been
greatly improved, both in lightness and strength. The road from Ipswich to Whitton, says the Bury
paper, is travelled every evening by several pedestrian hobby-horses; no less than six are seen at a
time, and the distance, which is 3 miles, is performed in 15 minutes. [The Athenaeum, May 1, 1819]


