venality (n.)

1610s, from French v&eacute;nalit&eacute; or directly from Late Latin venalitatem (nominative
venalitas) capability of being bought, from Latin venalis capable of being bought (see venal).


venal (adj.)

1650s, capable of being obtained for a price; that can be corrupted; 1660s, offered for sale, from
French v&eacute;nal, Old French venel for sale (of prostitutes, etc.; 12c.), from Latin venalis for
sale, to be sold; capable of being bribed, from venum (nominative *venus) for sale, from PIE root
*wes- (1) to buy, sell (cognates: Sanskrit vasnah purchase money, vasnam reward, vasnayati he
bargains, haggles; Greek onos price paid, purchase, oneisthai to buy). Typically with a bad sense of
ready to sell one's services or influence for money and from sordid motives; to be bought basely or
meanly.


vend (v.)

1620s, from Latin vendere to sell, give for a bribe; praise, cry up, contraction of venumdare offer
for sale, from venum for sale (see venal) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). Related: Vended; vending;
vendible (early 14c.). Vending machine is recorded from 1889.


vile (adj.)

late 13c., morally repugnant; morally flawed, corrupt, wicked; of no value; of inferior quality;
disgusting, foul, ugly; degrading, humiliating; of low estate, without worldly honor or esteem, from
Anglo-French ville, Old French vil shameful, dishonorable; low-born; cheap; ugly, hideous, from
Latin vilis cheap, worthless, base, common, of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *wes- (1) to
buy, sell (see venal). Related: Vilely; vileness; vilety (early 13c.).


monopoly (n.)

exclusive control of a commodity or trade, 1530s, from Latin monopolium, from Greek monopolion right
of exclusive sale, from mono- + polein to sell, from PIE root *pel- (5) to sell (cognates: Sanskrit
panate barters, purchases, Lithuanian pelnas gain, Old Church Slavonic splenu, Russian polon prey,
booty, Old Norse falr, Dutch veil, German feil for sale, venal).    Alternative form monopole
(1540s, from the Old French form of the word) was common in 16c. The popular board game, invented by
Charles Darrow, is from 1935. Monopoly money unreal currency is attested from 1972, in reference to
the paper used in the game.


