venereal (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to sexual desire or intercourse, from Latin venereus, venerius of
Venus; of sexual love, from venus (genitive veneris) sexual love, sexual desire (see Venus). Used of
sexually transmitted diseases from 1650s. Related: Venereally.


V.D. (n.)

1920, short for venereal disease (see venereal).


antaphrodisiac

1742 (adj.), 1753 (n.), used against venereal disease; see anti- + aphrodisiac.


snatch (n.)

c.1300, a trap, snare, from snatch (v.). Meaning a sudden grab is from 1570s; that of a small amount
is from 1590s. Sense in weight-lifting is from 1928. Vulgar slang sense of vulva is recorded from
1903; a much older venereal sense was sexual intercourse quickly performed (1580s).


crud (n.)

nonsense, rubbish, 1940, U.S. slang; originally 1920s army and college student slang for venereal
disease. Said to be a metathesis variant of curd, which actually makes it an unconscious return to
the original Middle English form of that word (see curd). As G.I. name for disease of any and every
sort it is attested from 1945.


satyriasis (n.)

excessively great venereal desire in the male, 1650s, medical Latin, from Greek satyriasis, from
satyros (see satyr). Also in same sense satyromania (1889).


chancre (n.)

also chanker, venereal ulcer, c.1600, from French chancre (15c.), literally cancer, from Latin
cancer (see cancer).


dose (n.)

early 15c., the giving of medicine (in a specified amount or at a stated time), from Middle French
dose (15c.) or directly from Late Latin dosis, from Greek dosis a portion prescribed, literally a
giving, used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medicine, from stem of didonai
to give (see date (n.1)). Slang meaning venereal disease is from 1914.


merkin (n.)

female pudenda, 1530s, apparently a variant of malkin in its sense of mop. Meaning artificial vagina
or 'counterfeit hair for a woman's privy parts'  is attested from 1610s. According to The Oxford
Companion to the Body, the custom of wearing merkins dates from mid-15c., was associated with
prostitutes, and was to disguise a want of pubic hair, shaved off either to exterminate body lice or
evidence of venereal disease.  This put a strange Whim in his Head; which was, to get the hairy
circle of [a prostitute's] Merkin .... This he dry'd well, and comb'd out, and then return'd to the
Cardinall, telling him, he had brought St. Peter's Beard. [Alexander Smith, A Complete History of
the Lives and Robberies of the most notorious Highwaymen, 1714]


syphilis (n.)

infectious venereal disease, 1718, Modern Latin, originally from the title of a poem, Syphilis, sive
Morbus Gallicus Syphilis, or the French Disease, published 1530, by Veronese doctor Girolamo
Fracastoro (1483-1553), which tells the tale of the shepherd Syphilus, supposed to be the first
sufferer from the disease. Fracastoro first used the word as a generic term for the disease in his
1546 treatise De Contagione. Why he chose the name is unknown; it may be intended as Latin for Pig-
lover, though there was also a Sipylus, a son of Niobe, in Ovid.


convent (n.)

c.1200, covent, cuvent, from Anglo-French covent, from Old French convent, from Latin conventus
assembly, used in Medieval Latin for religious house, originally past participle of convenire come
together (see convene). Not exclusively feminine until 18c. The form with restored Latin -n- emerged
early 15c. The Middle English form remains in London's Covent Garden district (notorious late 18c.
for brothels), so called because it had been the garden of a defunct monastery.    COVENT GARDEN
ABBESS. A bawd.  COVENT GARDEN AGUE. The venereal di&#383;ea&#383;e.  [Classical Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


virus (n.)

late 14c., venomous substance, from Latin virus poison, sap of plants, slimy liquid, a potent juice,
probably from PIE root *weis- to melt away, to flow, used of foul or malodorous fluids, with
specialization in some languages to poisonous fluid (cognates: Sanskrit visam poison, visah
poisonous; Avestan vish- poison; Latin viscum sticky substance, birdlime; Greek ios poison, ixos
mistletoe, birdlime; Old Church Slavonic vi&#353;nja cherry; Old Irish fi poison; Welsh gwy fluid,
water, gwyar blood). Main modern meaning agent that causes infectious disease first recorded 1728
(in reference to venereal disease). The computer sense is from 1972.


burn (v.)

12c., combination of Old Norse brenna to burn, light, and two originally distinct Old English verbs:
b&aelig;rnan to kindle (transitive) and beornan to be on fire (intransitive), all from Proto-
Germanic *brennan/*branajan (cognates: Middle Dutch bernen, Dutch branden, Old High German brinnan,
German brennen, Gothic -brannjan to set on fire). This perhaps is from PIE   *gwher- to heat, warm
(see warm (adj.)), or from PIE *bhre-n-u, from root *bhreue- to boil forth, well up (see brew (v.)).
Related: Burned/burnt (see -ed); burning.    Figuratively (of passions, battle, etc.) in Old
English. Meaning cheat, swindle, victimize is first attested 1650s. In late 18c, slang, burned meant
infected with venereal disease. To burn one's bridges (behind one) behave so as to destroy any
chance of returning to a status quo (attested by 1892 in Mark Twain), perhaps ultimately is from
reckless cavalry raids in the American Civil War. Slavic languages have historically used different
and unrelated words for the transitive and intransitive senses of set fire to/be on fire: for
example Polish pali&#263;/gorze&#263;, Russian &#382;e&#269;'/gorel.


