venerable (adj.)

early 15c., worthy of respect, from Old French venerable and directly from Latin venerabilis worthy
of reverence or respect, from venerari to worship, revere (see veneration). As a title, used in
reference to ecclesiastics (in the Anglican church, specifically of archdeacons) or those who had
obtained the first degree of canonization. Related: Venerably; venerability.


antique (adj.)

1530s, aged, venerable, from Middle French antique old (14c.), from Latin antiquus (later anticus)
ancient, former, of olden times; old, long in existence, aged; venerable; old-fashioned, from PIE
*anti in sense of before (see ante) + *okw- appearance (see eye (n.)). Originally pronounced in
English like its parallel antic, but French pronunciation and spelling were adopted from c.1700.


ven.

abbreviation of venerable.


Augustus

masc. proper name, from Latin augustus venerable (see august). The name originally was a cognomen
applied to Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus as emperor, with a sense something like his majesty.


august (adj.)

1660s, from Latin augustus venerable, majestic, magnificent, noble, probably originally consecrated
by the augurs, with favorable auguries (see augur (n.)); or else that which is increased (see
augment).


hoary (adj.)

1510s, gray or white with age (of hair); c.1600 as venerable, ancient; from hoar + -y (2). Related:
Hoariness.


Priscilla

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of Priscillus, diminutive of Priscus, from priscus antique, old-
fashioned, old, ancient, primitive, venerable; related to prior (see prior (adj.)).


nuanced (adj.)

1896, past participle adjective from verb nuance (q.v.).    The new co-operative history of English
literature which the University of Cambridge is now publishing prints genre without italics. And it
even permits one contributor--and a contributor who is discussing Shakespeare!--to say that
something is delicately nuanced. Is there now an English verb to nuance? It is terrible to think of
the bad language the scholars of the venerable English university might have used if nuanced had
been first discovered in the text of an American author. [Scribner's Magazine, January 1911]


August

eighth month, 1097, from Latin Augustus (mensis), sixth month of the later Roman calendar, renamed
from Sextilis in 8 B.C.E. to honor emperor Augustus Caesar, literally Venerable Caesar (see august
(adj.)). In England, the name replaced native Weodmona&eth; weed month.


Sebastian

masc. proper name, from Latin Sebastianus, from Greek Sebastianos, man of Sebastia, a city in Pontus
that was named for Augustus Caesar, first Roman emperor, from Greek sebastos venerable, a
translation of Latin augustus, the epithet of Caesar.


Herr

German equivalent of Mr., 1650s, originally nobler, superior, from Middle High German herre, from
Old High German herro, comparative of her noble, worthy, exalted, from PIE *kei-, a color adjective,
in suffixed form *koi-ro- here meaning gray, hoary, hence gray-haired, venerable. Cognate with Old
Frisian hera, Dutch heer; perhaps in this usage a loan-translation of Latin senior. Hence also
Herrenvolk master race, in Nazi ideology, the concept of the German people.


hoar (adj.)

Old English har hoary, gray, venerable, old, the connecting notion being gray hair, from Proto-
Germanic *haira (cognates: Old Norse harr gray-haired, old, Old Saxon, Old High German her
distinguished, noble, glorious, German hehr), from PIE *kei-, source of color adjectives (see hue
(n.1)). German also uses the word as a title of respect, in Herr. Of frost, it is recorded in Old
English, perhaps expressing the resemblance of the white feathers of frost to an old man's beard.
Used as an attribute of boundary stones in Anglo-Saxon, perhaps in reference to being gray with
lichens, hence its appearance in place-names.


vandal (n.)

1660s, willful destroyer of what is beautiful or venerable, from Vandals, name of the Germanic tribe
that sacked Rome in 455 under Genseric, from Latin Vandalus (plural Vandali), from the tribe's name
for itself (Old English Wendlas), perhaps from Proto-Germanic *wandljaz wanderer. The literal
historical sense in English is recorded from 1550s.    There does not seem to be in the story of the
capture of Rome by the Vandals any justification for the charge of willful and objectless
destruction of public buildings which is implied in the word 'vandalism.' It is probable that this
charge grew out of the fierce persecution which was carried on by [the Vandal king] Gaiseric and his
son against the Catholic Christians, and which is the darkest stain on their characters.
[Encyclopaedia Britannica, 13th ed., 1926]


grave (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French grave (14c.), from Latin gravis weighty, serious, heavy, grievous,
oppressive, from PIE root *gwere- (2) heavy (cognates: Sanskrit guruh heavy, weighty, venerable;
Greek baros weight, barys heavy in weight, often with the notion of strength, force; Old English
cweorn quern; Gothic kaurus heavy; Lettish gruts heavy). Greek barys (opposed to kouphos) also was
used figuratively, of suffering, sorrow, sobbing, and could mean oppressive, burdensome, grave,
dignified, impressive. The noun meaning accent mark over a vowel is c.1600, from French.


chestnut (n.)

1560s, from chesten nut (1510s), with superfluous nut (n.) + Middle English chasteine, from Old
French chastain (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;taigne), from Latin castanea chestnut, chestnut tree,
from Greek kastaneia, which the Greeks thought meant either nut from Castanea in Pontus, or nut from
Castana in Thessaly, but probably both places are named for the trees, not the other way around, and
the word is borrowed from a language of Asia Minor (compare Armenian kask chestnut, kaskeni chestnut
tree). In reference to the dark reddish-brown color, 1650s. Applied to the horse-chestnut by 1832.
Slang sense of venerable joke or story is from 1885, explained 1888 by Joseph Jefferson (see
Lippincott's Monthly Magazine, January 1888) as probably abstracted from the 1816 melodrama The
Broken Sword by William Dimond where an oft-repeated story involving a chestnut tree figures in an
exchange between the characters Captain Zavior and Pablo:   Zav. Let me see--ay! it is exactly six
years since that peace being restored to Spain, and my ship paid off, my kind brother offered me a
snug hammock in the dwelling of my forefathers. I mounted a mule at Barcelona and trotted away for
my native mountains. At the dawn of the fourth day's journey, I entered the wood of Collares, when,
suddenly, from the thick boughs of a cork-tree--   Pab. [Jumping up.] A chesnut, Captain, a chesnut!
Zav. Bah, you booby! I say, a cork!   Pab. And I swear, a chesnut. Captain, this is the twenty-
seventh time 1 have heard you relate this story, and you invariably said, a chesnut, till now.
Jefferson traced the connection through William Warren, the veteran comedian of Boston who often
played Pablo in the melodrama.


