venison (n.)

c.1300, from Old French venesoun meat of large game, especially deer or boar, also a hunt, from
Latin venationem (nominative venatio) a hunt, hunting, the chase, also game as the product of the
hunt, from venatus, past participle of venari to hunt, pursue, probably from PIE *wen-a-, from root
*wen- (1) to strive for, desire (see Venus).


numbles (n.)

offal, from Old French nombles loin of veal, fillet of beef, haunch of venison, from Latin lumulus,
diminutive of lumbus loin (see lumbago).


venery (n.2)

hunting, the sports of the chase, early 14c., from Old French venerie, from Medieval Latin venaria
beasts of the chase, game, from Latin venari to hunt, pursue (see venison).


vim (n.)

1843, usually said to be from Latin vim, accusative of vis strength, force, power, vigor, energy,
from PIE root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force,
desire (see venison). But based on the early uses OED suggests the possibility that the word is of a
purely inventive or interjectional origin.


violation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French violacion and directly from Latin violationem (nominative violatio) an
injury, irreverence, profanation, from past participle stem of violare to treat with violence,
outrage, dishonor, perhaps an irregular derivative of vis strength, force, power, energy, from PIE
root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force, desire
(see venison).


invitation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin invitationem (nominative invitatio) an invitation, incitement, challenge, noun
of action from past participle stem of invitare invite, treat, entertain, originally be pleasant
toward, from in- toward (see in- (2)). Second element is obscure; Watkins suggests a suffixed form
of root *weie- to go after something, pursue with vigor, and a connection to English gain (see
venison). Meaning the spoken or written form in which a person is invited is from 1610s.


gain (v.)

1520s, from Middle French gagner, from Old French gaaignier to earn, gain; trade; capture, win, also
work in the fields, cultivate land, from Frankish *waidanjan hunt, forage, also graze, pasture, from
Proto-Germanic *wartho hunting ground (cognates: Old English wa&thorn; hunting, German Weide
pasture, pasturage, Old Norse vei&eth;r hunting, catch of fish), from PIE *weie- to strive after,
pursue with vigor, desire (see venison). Related: Gained; gaining; gainer. To gain on advance nearer
is from 1719. To gain ground (1620s) was originally military.


