venomous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French venimeus, Old French venimos (12c., Modern French venimeux), from venim
(see venom). Earliest recorded use is figurative; literal sense by early 14c. Related: Venomously;
venomousness.


venom (n.)

mid-13c., venim, venym, poison secreted by some animals and transferred by biting, from Anglo-French
and Old French venim, venin poison; malice, from Vulgar Latin *venimen (source also of Italian
veleno, Spanish veneno), from Latin venenum poison, earlier (pre-classical) drug, medical potion,
also charm, seduction, probably originally love potion, from PIE *wenes-no-, from root *wen- (1) to
strive after, wish, desire (see Venus). Variously deformed in post-Latin languages, apparently by
dissimilation. Modern spelling in English from late 14c. The meaning bitter, virulent feeling or
language is first recorded c.1300.


envenom (v.)

c.1300, envenymen, from Old French envenimer (12c.) to poison, taint; from en- (see en- (1)) + venim
(see venom). Figurative use is from late 14c. Related: Envenomed; envenoming.


antivenin (n.)

1894, from anti- +  venin, from venom + chemical suffix -in (2). Perhaps immediately from French
antivenin.


basil (n.)

aromatic shrubby plant, early 15c., from Old French basile (15c., Modern French basilic), from
Medieval Latin basilicum, from Greek basilikon (phyton) royal (plant), from basileus king (see
Basil). So called, probably, because it was believed to have been used in making royal perfumes. In
Latin, confused with basiliscus (see basilisk) because it was supposed to be an antidote to the
basilisk's venom.


fang (n.)

Old English fang prey, spoils, plunder, booty; a seizing or taking, from gefangen, past participle
of fon seize, take, capture, from Proto-Germanic *fango- (cognates: Old Frisian fangia, Middle Dutch
and Dutch vangen, Old Norse fanga, German fangen, Gothic fahan), from PIE root *pag- to make firm,
fix; connected to Latin pax (genitive pacis) peace (see pact).    The sense of canine tooth (1550s)
probably developed from Old English fengto&eth;, literally catching- or grasping-tooth. Transferred
to the venom tooth of a serpent, etc., by 1800.


attercop (n.)

spider, Old English attorcoppe, literally poison-head, from ator poison, venom, from Proto-Germanic
*aitra- poisonous ulcer (cognates: Old Norse eitr, Old High German eitar poison; German eiter pus,
Old High German eiz abscess, boil; Old English atorcr&aelig;ft art of poisoning) + copp top, summit,
round head, probably also spider (compare cobweb and Dutch spinne-cop spider).    Amptes &amp;
attircoppes &amp; suche o&thorn;er &thorn;at ben euere bisy ben maide to schewe man ensaumple of
stodye &amp; labour. [Elucidarium of Honorius of Autun (Wycliffite version) c.1400]


mushroom (n.)

mid-15c., muscheron, musseroun (attested 1327 as a surname, John Mussheron), from Anglo-French
musherun, Old French meisseron (11c., Modern French mousseron), perhaps from Late Latin mussirionem
(nominative mussirio), though this might as well be borrowed from French. Barnhart says of uncertain
origin. Klein calls it a word of pre-Latin origin, used in the North of France; OED says it usually
is held to be a derivative of French mousse moss (from Germanic), and Weekley agrees, saying it is
properly applied to variety which grows in moss, but Klein says they have nothing in common. For the
final -m Weekley refers to grogram, vellum, venom. Modern spelling is from 1560s.    Used
figuratively for something or someone that makes a sudden appearance in full form from 1590s. In
reference to the shape of clouds after explosions, etc., it is attested from 1916, though the actual
phrase mushroom cloud does not appear until 1955.


