vent (n.)

c.1400, anus, from Old French vent from verb eventer (see vent (v.)) and in part from Middle English
aventer, from the French verb. Perhaps also merged with or influenced by Middle English fent opening
or slit in a the front of a garment (usually held closed with a brooch), c.1400, from Old French
fente, from Latin findere to split (see fissure). Meaning outlet for water, also air hole, breathing
hole is from mid-15c. Meaning action of venting is recorded from c.1500.


vent (v.)

late 14c., emit from a confined space, probably a shortening of aventer expose oneself to the air
(c.1300), from Old French eventer let out, expose to air, from Vulgar Latin *exventare, from Latin
ex- out + ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Sense of express freely first recorded 1590s. Sense of
divulge, publish (1590s) is behind phrase vent one's spleen (see spleen). Related: Vented; venting.


hovel (n.)

mid-14c., roofed passage, vent for smoke, later shed for animals (mid-15c.), of unknown origin.
Meaning shed for human habitation; rude or miserable cabin is from 1620s. It also sometimes meant
canopied niche for a statue or image (mid-15c.).


windmill (n.)

c.1300, from wind (n.1) + mill (n.). Similar formation in German Windm&uuml;hle, Dutch windmolen,
French moulin &agrave; vent. Verb meaning to swing the arms wildly is recorded from 1888. Related:
Windmilled; windmilling.


inveigh (v.)

late 15c., to introduce, from Latin invehi to attack with words, originally carry oneself against,
passive infinitive of invehere bring in, carry in, from in- against (see in- (1)) + vehere to carry
(see vehicle). Meaning to give vent to violent denunciation is from 1520s. Related: Inveighed;
inveighing.


bouche (n.)

French, literally mouth (Old French boche, 11c.), from Latin bucca, literally cheek, which in Late
Latin replaced os (see oral) as the word for mouth (and also is the source of Italian bocca, Spanish
boca). Borrowed in English in various senses, such as king's allowance of food for his retinue (mid-
15c.); mouth (1580s); metal plug for a cannon's vent (1862; verb in this sense from 1781).


cesspool (n.)

also cess-pool, 1670s, the first element perhaps an alteration of cistern, perhaps a shortened form
of recess [Klein]; or the whole may be an alteration of suspiral (c.1400), drainpipe, from Old
French sospiral a vent, air hole, from sospirer breathe, from Latin suspirare breathe deep
[Barnhart]. Meaning extended to tank at the end of the pipe, which would account for a possible
folk-etymology change in final syllable.    Other possible etymologies: Italian cesso privy, from
Latin secessus place of retirement (in Late Latin privy, drain); dialectal suspool, from suss, soss
puddle; or cess a bog on the banks of a tidal river.


hang (v.)

a fusion of Old English hon suspend (transitive, class VII strong verb; past tense heng, past
participle hangen), and Old English hangian (weak, intransitive, past tense hangode) be suspended;
also probably influenced by Old Norse hengja suspend, and hanga be suspended. All from Proto-
Germanic *hangen (intransitive) to hang (cognates: Old Frisian hangia, Dutch hangen, German
h&auml;ngen), from PIE *konk- to hang (cognates: Gothic hahan, Hittite gang- to hang, Sanskrit
sankate wavers, Latin cunctari to delay; see also second element in Stonehenge). As a method of
execution, in late Old English (but originally specifically of crucifixion).   Hung emerged as past
participle 16c. in northern England dialect, and hanged endured only in legal language (which tends
to be conservative) and metaphors extended from it (I'll be hanged). Teen slang sense of spend time
first recorded 1951; hang around idle, loiter is from 1830, and hang out (v.) is from 1811. Hang
fire (1781) was originally used of guns that were slow in communicating the fire through the vent to
the charge. To let it all hang out be relaxed and uninhibited is from 1967.


take (v.)

late Old English tacan to take, seize, from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka take,
grasp, lay hold, past tense tok, past participle tekinn; Swedish ta, past participle tagit), from
Proto-Germanic *takan- (cognates: Middle Low German tacken, Middle Dutch taken, Gothic tekan to
touch), from Germanic root *tak- to take, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally meaning to touch.
As the principal verb for to take, it gradually replaced Middle English nimen, from Old English
niman, from the usual West Germanic *nem- root (source of German nehmen, Dutch nemen; see nimble).
OED calls take one of the elemental words of the language; take up alone has 55 varieties of meaning
in that dictionary's 2nd print edition. Basic sense is to lay hold of, which evolved to accept,
receive (as in take my advice) c.1200; absorb (take a punch) c.1200; choose, select (take the high
road) late 13c.; to make, obtain (take a shower) late 14c.; to become affected by (take sick)
c.1300.   Take five is 1929, from the approximate time it takes to smoke a cigarette. Take it easy
first recorded 1880; take the plunge act decisively is from 1876; take the rap accept (undeserved)
punishment is from 1930. Phrase take it or leave it is recorded from 1897. To take it out on
(someone or something) vent one's anger on other than what caused it is by 1840.


wind (n.1)

air in motion, Old English wind wind, from Proto-Germanic *windaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian,
Middle Dutch, Dutch wind, Old Norse vindr, Old High German wind, German Wind, Gothic winds), from
PIE *we-nt-o- blowing, from root *we- to blow (cognates: Sanskrit va-, Greek aemi-, Gothic waian,
Old English wawan, Old High German wajan, German wehen, Old Church Slavonic vejati to blow; Sanskrit
vatah, Avestan vata-, Hittite huwantis, Latin ventus, Old Church Slavonic vetru, Lithuanian vejas
wind; Lithuanian vetra tempest, storm; Old Irish feth air; Welsh gwynt, Breton gwent wind).
Normal pronunciation evolution made this word rhyme with kind and rind (Donne rhymes it with mind),
but it shifted to a short vowel 18c., probably from influence of windy, where the short vowel is
natural. A sad loss for poets, who now must rhyme it only with sinned and a handful of weak words.
Symbolic of emptiness and vanity since late 13c.    I have forgot much, Cynara! gone with the wind.
[Ernest Dowson, 1896]    Meaning breath is attested from late Old English; especially breath in
speaking (early 14c.), so long-winded, also easy or regular breathing (early 14c.), hence second
wind in the figurative sense (by 1830), an image from the sport of hunting.   Winds wind instruments
of an orchestra is from 1876. Figurative phrase which way the wind blows for the current state of
affairs is suggested from c.1400. To get wind of receive information about is by 1809, perhaps
inspired by French avoir le vent de. To take the wind out of (one's) sails in the figurative sense
(by 1883) is an image from sailing, where a ship without wind can make no progress. Wind-chill index
is recorded from 1939. Wind energy from 1976. Wind vane from 1725.


