venture (n.)

c.1400, fortune, chance, shortening of aventure (n.), a variant of adventure (n.); also from Anglo-
French venture. Sense of risky undertaking first recorded 1560s; meaning enterprise of a business
nature is recorded from 1580s. Venture capital is attested from 1943.


venturesome (adj.)

1660s, from venture + -some (1).


venture (v.)

early 15c., to risk the loss (of something), shortened form of aventure, itself a form of adventure.
General sense of to dare, to presume is recorded from 1550s. Related: Ventured; venturing.    Nought
venter nought have [Heywood, Proverbs, 1546]


gamble (n.)

risky venture, 1823, from gamble (v.).


venturous (adj.)

daring, bold, hardy, 1560s, shortened form of adventurous, influenced by venture.


Ferdinand

masc. proper name, of Germanic origin, first element perhaps Proto-Germanic *farthi, abstract noun
from root *far- to fare, travel (see fare (v.)); second element perhaps related to Old English
ne&eth;an, Old High German nendan to risk, venture.


emprise (n.)

c.1300, chivalrous endeavor, from Old French emprise (12c.) enterprise, venture, adventure,
undertaking, from Vulgar Latin *imprensa (source of Proven&ccedil;al empreza, Spanish empresa,
Italian impresa), from *imprendere to undertake, from in- + prehendere to take (see prehensile).
Archaic in English; in French now with a literal sense a hold, a grip.


adventure (n.)

c.1200, auenture that which happens by chance, fortune, luck, from Old French aventure (11c.)
chance, accident, occurrence, event, happening, from Latin adventura (res) (a thing) about to
happen, from adventurus, future participle of advenire to come to, reach, arrive at, from ad- to
(see ad-) + venire to come (see venue).    Meaning developed through risk/danger (a trial of one's
chances), c.1300, and perilous undertaking (late 14c.) and thence to a novel or exciting incident
(1560s). Earlier it also meant a wonder, a miracle; accounts of marvelous things (13c.). The -d- was
restored 15c.-16c. Venture is a 15c. variant.


fellow (n.)

c.1200, from Old English feolaga fellow, partner, from Old Norse felagi, from fe money (see fee) +
verbal base denoting lay (see lay (v.)). Sense is of one who puts down money with another in a joint
venture. Used familiarly since mid-15c. for man, male person, but not etymologically masculine.
University senses (mid-15c.), corresponding to Latin socius) evolved from notion of one of the
corporation who constitute a college and who are paid from its revenues. First record of fellow-
traveler in sense of one who sympathizes with the Communist movement but is not a party member, is
from 1936, translating Russian poputchik. The literal sense is attested in English from 1610s.


dare (v.)

from first and third person singular of Old English durran to brave danger, dare; venture, presume,
from Proto-Germanic *ders- (cognates: Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan),
from PIE *dhers- to dare, be courageous (cognates: Sanskrit dadharsha to be bold; Old Persian
dar&#353;- to dare; Greek thrasys bold; Old Church Slavonic druzate to be bold, dare; Lithuanian
dristi to dare, drasus courageous).    An Old English irregular preterite-present verb: darr,
dearst, dear were first, second and third person singular present indicative; mostly regularized
16c., though past tense dorste survived as durst, but is now dying, persisting mainly in northern
English dialect. Meaning to challenge or defy (someone) is first recorded 1570s.


toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


