ventral (adj.)

1739, from French ventral or directly from Late Latin ventralis of or pertaining to the belly or
stomach, from Latin venter (genitive ventris) belly, paunch; stomach, appetite; womb, unborn child,
from PIE *wend-tri- (cognates: Latin vesica bladder, Sanskrit vastih bladder, Old High German
wanast, German wanst paunch, belly), perhaps from root *udero- abdomen, womb, stomach (see uterus).


vesicular (adj.)

1715, from Modern Latin vesicularis, from vesicula little blister, diminutive of vesica bladder (see
ventral).


vesicant (n.)

a blistering agent, 1660s, from Medieval Latin vesicantem (nominative vesicans), present participle
of vesicare, from vesica a bladder, a blister (see ventral). From 1826 as an adjective.


vesicle (n.)

small, bladder-like structure, early 15c., from Middle French vesicule, from Latin vesicula little
blister, diminutive of vesica bladder, blister (see ventral).


ventricle (n.)

late 14c., small chamber or cavity within a bodily organ, especially of the heart, from Latin
ventriculus (in reference to the heart, ventriculus cordis), literally little belly, diminutive of
venter (genitive ventris) belly (see ventral).


distal (adj.)

1808, formed from distant + -al (1) on model of central, dorsal, ventral, etc.


gastropod (n.)

1826, gasteropod (modern spelling by 1854), from Modern Latin Gasteropoda, name of a class of
mollusks, from Greek gaster (genitive gastros) stomach (see gastric) + pous (genitive podos) foot
(see foot (n.)). From the ventral position of the mollusk's foot.


ventriloquy (n.)

1580s, from Late Latin ventriloquus, from Latin venter (genitive ventris) belly (see ventral) +
loqui speak (see locution). Related: Ventriloquial; ventriloquize.    Patterned on Greek
engastrimythos, literally speaking in the belly, which was not originally an entertainer's trick but
rather a rumbling sort of internal speech, regarded as a sign of spiritual inspiration or (more
usually) demonic possession. Reference to the modern activity so called seems to have begun early
18c., and by 1797 it was being noted that this was a curiously inappropriate word to describe
throwing the voice.


