venue (n.)

c.1300, a coming for the purpose of attack, from Old French venue coming (12c.), from fem. past
participle of venir to come, from Latin venire to come, from PIE root *gwa- to go, come (cognates:
Old English cuman to come; see come). The sense of place where a case in law is tried is first
recorded 1530s. Extended to locality in general, especially site of a concert or sporting event
(1857). Change of venue is from Blackstone (1768).


venire

1660s, elliptical for venire facias (mid-15c.), Latin, literally that you cause to come, formerly
the first words in a writ to a sheriff to summon a jury. See venue.


prevenient (adj.)

1650s, from Latin praevenientem (nominative praeveniens), present participle of praevenire, from
prae- (see pre-) + venire to come (see venue).


parvenu (n.)

upstart, 1802, from French parvenu, said of an obscure person who has made a great fortune
(Littr&eacute;);  noun use of past participle of parvenir to arrive (12c.), from Latin pervenire to
come up, arrive, attain, from per- through (see per (prep.)) + venire to come (see venue). As an
adjective from 1828.


supervene (v.)

1640s, come as something additional, from Latin supervenire come on top of, come in addition to,
come after, follow upon, from super over, upon (see super-) + venire come (see venue). Related:
Supervened; supervening.


convene (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French convenir to suit, agree, from Latin convenire unite, be suitable,
agree, assemble, from com- together (see com-) + venire to come (see venue). Related: Convened;
convener; convening.


circumvent (v.)

mid-15c., to surround by hostile stratagem, from Latin circumventus, past participle of circumvenire
to get around, be around, encircle, surround, in figurative sense to oppress, assail, cheat, from
circum around (see circum-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning to go round is from 1840. Related:
Circumvented; circumventing.


subvention (n.)

early 15c., from Old French subvencion support, assistance, taxation (14c.), from Late Latin
subventionem (nominative subventio) assistance, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
subvenire come to one's aid, assist, reinforce, from sub up to (see sub-) + venire to come (see
venue).


event (n.)

1570s, from Middle French event, from Latin eventus occurrence, accident, event, fortune, fate, lot,
issue, from past participle stem of evenire to come out, happen, result, from ex- out (see ex-) +
venire to come (see venue). Event horizon in astrophysics is from 1969.


intervention (n.)

early 15c., intercession, intercessory prayer, from Middle French intervention or directly from Late
Latin interventionem (nominative interventio) an interposing, noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin intervenire to come between, interrupt, from inter- between (see inter-) + venire come
(see venue).


prevent (v.)

early 15c., act in anticipation of, from Latin praeventus, past participle of praevenire come
before, anticipate, hinder, in Late Latin also to prevent, from prae before (see pre-) + venire to
come (see venue). Originally literal; sense of anticipate to hinder was in Latin, but not recorded
in English until 1540s.


intervene (v.)

1580s, back-formation from intervention, or else from Latin intervenire to come between, intervene,
interrupt, from inter between (see inter-) + venire to come (see venue). Related: Intervened;
intervening.


contravene (v.)

1560s, from Middle French contravenir to transgress, decline, depart, from Late Latin contravenire
to come against, in Medieval Latin to transgress, from Latin contra against (see contra) + venire to
come (see venue). Related: Contravened; contravening.


avenue (n.)

c.1600, a way of approach (originally a military word), from Middle French avenue way of access,
from Old French avenue act of approaching, arrival, noun use of fem. of avenu, past participle of
avenir to come to, arrive, from Latin advenire to come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come
(see venue). Meaning shifted to a way of approach to a country-house, usually bordered by trees,
hence, a broad, tree-lined roadway (1650s), then to wide, main street (by 1846, especially in U.S.).


souvenir (n.)

1775, a remembrance or memory, from French souvenir (12c.), from Old French noun use of souvenir
(v.) to remember, come to mind, from Latin subvenire come to mind, from sub- up from below (see
sub-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning token of remembrance, memento is first recorded 1782.


advent (n.)

important arrival, 1742, an extended sense of  Advent season before Christmas (Old English), from
Latin adventus a coming, approach, arrival, in Church Latin the coming of the Savior, from past
participle stem of advenire arrive, come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come (see venue). In
English, also sometimes extended to the Pentecost.


provenance (n.)

1785, from French provenance origin, production, from provenant, present participle of Middle French
provenir come forth, arise, originate, from Latin provenire come forth, originate, appear, arise,
from pro- forth (see pro-) + venire come (see venue).


adventure (n.)

c.1200, auenture that which happens by chance, fortune, luck, from Old French aventure (11c.)
chance, accident, occurrence, event, happening, from Latin adventura (res) (a thing) about to
happen, from adventurus, future participle of advenire to come to, reach, arrive at, from ad- to
(see ad-) + venire to come (see venue).    Meaning developed through risk/danger (a trial of one's
chances), c.1300, and perilous undertaking (late 14c.) and thence to a novel or exciting incident
(1560s). Earlier it also meant a wonder, a miracle; accounts of marvelous things (13c.). The -d- was
restored 15c.-16c. Venture is a 15c. variant.


presby-

word-forming element meaning old, from Greek presby-, combining form of presbys elder, old man,
possibly originally one who leads the cattle, from *pres- before, extended form of *pre- (see per) +
root of bous cow. Watkins, however, has it from PIE *pres-gwu- going before, with second element
from root *gw-u- going (see venue).


revenue (n.)

early 15c., income from property or possessions, from Middle French revenue, in Old French, a
return, noun use of fem. past participle of revenir come back (10c.), from Latin revenire return,
come back, from re- back (see re-) + venire come (see venue). Meaning public income is first
recorded 1680s; revenue sharing popularized from 1971. Revenuer U.S. Department of Revenue agent,
the bane of Appalachian moonshiners, first attested 1880.


invention (n.)

c.1400, devised method of organization, from Old French invencion (13c.) and directly from Latin
inventionem (nominative inventio) faculty of invention; a finding, discovery, noun of action from
past participle stem of invenire devise, discover, find, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + venire to
come (see venue).    Meaning finding or discovering of something is early 15c. in English; sense of
thing invented is first recorded 1510s. Etymological sense preserved in Invention of the Cross,
Church festival (May 3) celebrating the reputed finding of the Cross of the Crucifixion by Helena,
mother of Constantine, in 326 C.E.


turf (n.)

Old English turf, tyrf slab of soil and grass, sod, also surface of grassland, from Proto-Germanic
*turb- (cognates: Old Norse torf, Danish t&oslash;rv, Old Frisian turf, Old High German zurba,
German Torf), from PIE root *drebh- to wind, compress (cognates: Sanskrit darbhah tuft of grass).
Especially the race course, hence the turf the profession of racing horses (1755). French tourbe
turf is a Germanic loan-word. The Old English plural was identical with the singular, but in Middle
English turves sometimes was used. Slang meaning territory claimed by a gang is attested from 1953
in Brooklyn, N.Y.; earlier it had a jive talk sense of the street, the sidewalk (1930s), which is
attested in hobo use from 1899, and before that the work and venue of a prostitute (1860). Turf war
is recorded from 1962.


