veracity (n.)

1620s, from French v&eacute;racit&eacute; (17c.), from Medieval Latin veracitatem (nominative
veracitas) truthfulness, from Latin verax (genitive veracis) truthful, from verus true (see very).


troth (n.)

truth, verity, late 12c., from a phonetic variant of Old English treow&eth; faithfulness, veracity,
truth (see truth). Restricted to Midlands and Northern England dialect after 16c., and to certain
archaic phrases (such as plight one's troth). Also see betroth.


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


trust (n.)

c.1200, reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious
faith, from Old Norse traust help, confidence, protection, support, from Proto-Germanic abstract
noun *traustam (cognates: Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost comfort, consolation, Old High German
trost trust, fidelity, German Trost comfort, consolation, Gothic trausti agreement, alliance), from
Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-, source of Old English treowian to believe, trust, and treowe faithful,
trusty (see true (adj.)).    from c.1300 as reliability, trustworthiness; trustiness, fidelity,
faithfulness; from late 14c. as confident expectation and that on which one relies. From early 15c.
in legal sense of confidence placed in a one who holds or enjoys the use of property entrusted to
him by its legal owner; mid-15c. as condition of being legally entrusted. Meaning businesses
organized to reduce competition is recorded from 1877. Trust-buster is recorded from 1903.


