verge (n.)

edge, rim, mid-15c., from Old French verge twig, branch; measuring rod; penis; rod or wand of office
(12c.), hence, from the last sense, scope, territory dominated (as in estre suz la verge de be under
the authority of), from Latin virga shoot, rod, stick, slender green branch, of unknown origin.
Earliest attested sense in English is now-obsolete meaning male member, penis (c.1400). Modern sense
is from the notion of within the verge (c.1500, also as Anglo-French dedeinz la verge), i.e. subject
to the Lord High Steward's authority (as symbolized by the rod of office), originally a 12-mile
radius round the king's court. Sense shifted to the outermost edge of an expanse or area. Meaning
point at which something happens (as in on the verge of) is first attested c.1600. A very curious
sense development. [Weekley]


verger (n.)

one who carries a verge as an officer of the church, c.1400, probably from Anglo-French *verger,
from verge (see verge (n.)).


verge (v.1)

tend, incline, c.1600, from Latin vergere to bend, turn, tend toward, incline, from PIE *werg- to
turn, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). Influenced by verge (v.2) provide with a
border (c.1600); be adjacent to (1787), from verge (n.). Related: Verged; verging.


vergence (n.)

1902 in ophthalmology, from verge (v.) + -ence. From 1660s as fact or condition of being inclined
(toward something). Related: Vergency.


diverge (v.)

1660s, from Modern Latin divergere go in different directions, from dis- apart (see dis-) + vergere
to bend, turn (see verge (v.)). Originally a term in optics; the figurative sense is 19c. Related:
Diverged; diverging.


converge (v.)

1690s, from Late Latin convergere to incline together from com- together (see com-) + vergere to
bend (see verge (v.)). Related: Converged; converging.


rim (n.)

Old English rima edge, border, verge, coast, as in s&aelig;rima seashore, literally rim of the sea,
and d&aelig;grima dawn, literally rim of the day. Related to Old Norse rime, rimi a raised strip of
land, ridge, Old Frisian rim edge, but with no other known cognates. The snare drummer's rim shot
(striking the rim and the head at once) is recorded from 1934.


brinkmanship (n.)

also brinksmanship, with parasitic -s- and construction based on salesmanship, sportsmanship, etc.;
from brink (the image of the brink of war dates to at least 1840).    Associated with the policies
advocated by John Foster Dulles (1888-1959), U.S. Secretary of State 1953-1959. The word springs
from Dulles' philosophy as outlined in a magazine interview [with Time-Life Washington bureau chief
James Shepley] early 1956:    The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the
necessary art. If you cannot master it, you inevitably get into war. If you try to run away from it,
if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.    The quote was widely criticized by the
Eisenhower Administration's opponents, and the first attested use of brinkmanship seems to have been
in such a context, a few weeks after the magazine appeared, by Democratic presidential candidate
Adlai Stevenson criticizing Dulles for boasting of his brinkmanship, ... the art of bringing us to
the edge of the nuclear abyss.


yard (n.2)

measure of length, Old English gerd (Mercian), gierd (West Saxon) rod, staff, stick; measure of
length, from West Germanic *gazdijo, from Proto-Germanic *gazdjo- stick, rod (cognates: Old Saxon
gerda, Old Frisian ierde, Dutch gard rod; Old High German garta, German gerte switch, twig, Old
Norse gaddr spike, sting, nail), from PIE root *ghazdh-o- rod, staff, pole (cognates: Latin hasta
shaft, staff). The nautical yard-arm retains the original sense of stick.    Originally in Anglo-
Saxon times a land measure of roughly 5 meters (a length later called rod, pole, or perch). Modern
measure of three feet is attested from late 14c. (earlier rough equivalent was the ell of 45 inches,
and the verge). In Middle English and after, the word also was a euphemism for penis (as in Love's
Labour's Lost, V.ii.676). Slang meaning one hundred dollars first attested 1926, American English.
Middle English yerd (Old English gierd) also was yard-land, yard of land, a varying measure but
often about 30 acres or a quarter of a hide.


