vernacular (adj.)

c.1600, native to a country, from Latin vernaculus domestic, native, indigenous; pertaining to home-
born slaves, from verna home-born slave, native, a word of Etruscan origin. Used in English in the
sense of Latin vernacula vocabula, in reference to language. As a noun, native speech or language of
a place, from 1706.    For human speech is after all a democratic product, the creation, not of
scholars and grammarians, but of unschooled and unlettered people. Scholars and men of education may
cultivate and enrich it, and make it flower into the beauty of a literary language; but its rarest
blooms are grafted on a wild stock, and its roots are deep-buried in the common soil. [Logan
Pearsall Smith, Words and Idioms, 1925]


Romance (adj.)

mid-14c., French; in the vernacular language of France (contrasted to Latin), from Old French romanz
French; vernacular, from Late Latin Romanice, from Latin Romanicus (see Roman). Extended 1610s to
other modern tongues derived from Latin (Spanish, Italian, etc.); thus pertaining to the languages
which arose out of the Latin language of the provinces of Rome. Compare romance (n.).


tu quoque

Latin, literally thou also (or, in modern vernacular, so are you!); an argument which consists in
retorting accusations.


romance (n.)

c.1300, a story, written or recited, of the adventures of a knight, hero, etc., often one designed
principally for entertainment, from Old French romanz verse narrative (Modern French roman),
originally an adverb, in the vernacular language, from Vulgar Latin *romanice scribere to write in a
Romance language (one developed from Latin instead of Frankish), from Latin Romanicus of or in the
Roman style, from Romanus Roman (see Roman).    The sense evolution is because medieval vernacular
tales usually told chivalric adventures full of marvelous incidents and heroic deeds. In reference
to literary works, often in Middle English meaning ones written in French but also applied to native
compositions. Literary sense extended by 1660s to a love story. Meaning adventurous quality first
recorded 1801; that of love affair is from 1916. Romance novel attested from 1964. Compare Romance
(adj.).


Ebonics (n.)

African-American vernacular English, 1975, as title of a book by U.S. professor R.L. Williams
(b.1930); a blend of ebony and phonics.


choad (n.)

also chode, penis, c.1968, U.S. teen slang, of unknown origin. Guesses include supposed Navajo
chodis penis [Cassell's Dictionary of Slang 2005], or a supposed Hindi, Bengali or Gujarati
vernacular word for copulate [New Hacker's Dictionary, 1996].


Magdalene

fem. proper name, from Latin (Maria) Magdalena, from Greek Magdalene, literally woman of Magdala,
from Aramaic Maghdela, place on the Sea of Galilee, literally tower. The vernacular form of the
name, via French, has come to English as maudlin.


specialty (n.)

c.1300, particular affection; special attachment or favor, partiality, from Old French especialte,
more vernacular form of specialite (see speciality). Compare personalty/personality; realty/reality.
From early 15c. as unusual, or extraordinary thing; specialized branch of learning; peculiar
quality, distinctive characteristic.


Petronilla

also Petronella, fem. proper name, a feminine diminutive of Latin Petronius. Also the name of a
saint much-invoked against fevers and regarded as a daughter of St. Peter. The name was accordingly
regarded to be a derivative of Peter and became one of the most popular of girls' names, the
vernacular Parnell being still used as a proper name as late as the 18th century in Cornwall
[Reaney].


Jeremiah

masc. proper name, Old Testament prophet (see jeremiad) who flourished c.626-586 B.C.E., from Late
Latin Jeremias, from Hebrew Yirmeyah, probably literally may Jehovah exalt, but Klein suggests it
also might be short for Yirmeyahu the Lord casts, the Lord founds, and compares the first element in
Jerusalem. The vernacular form in English was Jeremy.


lens (n.)

1690s, glass to regulate light rays, from Latin lens (genitive lentis) lentil, on analogy of the
double-convex shape. See lentil. Of the eye from 1719.    In the vernacular of the photographer,
anyone crowding to the front of a group, staring into the lens, or otherwise attracting attention to
himself is known as a lens louse. [American Photography, vol. 40, 1946; the term dates from 1915]


macaronic (adj.)

1610s, in reference to a form of verse consisting of vernacular words in a Latin context with Latin
endings; applied loosely to verse in which two or more languages are jumbled together; from Modern
Latin macaronicus (coined 1517 by Teofilo Folengo), from dialectal Italian maccarone (see macaroni),
in reference to the mixture of words in the verse: quoddam pulmentum farina, caseo, botiro
compaginatum, grossum, rude, et rusticanum [Folengo].


tilde (n.)

1864, from Spanish, metathesis of Catalan title, from vernacular form of Medieval Latin titulus
stroke over an abridged word to indicate missing letters, a specialized sense of Latin titulus,
literally inscription, heading (see title (n.)). The mark itself represents an -n- and was used in
Medieval Latin manuscripts in an abridged word over a preceding letter to indicate a missing -n- and
save space.


James

masc. proper name, name of two of Christ's disciples, late 12c. Middle English vernacular form of
Late Latin Jacomus (source of Old French James, Spanish Jaime, Italian Giacomo), altered from Latin
Jacobus (see Jacob).    The Welsh form was Iago, the Cornish Jago. Fictional British spy James Bond
dates from 1953, created by British author Ian Fleming (1908-1964), who plausibly is said to have
taken the name from that of U.S. ornithologist James Bond (1900-1989), an expert on Caribbean birds.


Scotch (adj.)

of Scotland, 1590s, contraction of Scottish. Disdained by the Scottish because of the many insulting
and pejorative formations made from it by the English (such as Scotch greys lice; Scotch attorney, a
Jamaica term from 1864 for strangler vines).   Scotch-Irish is from 1744 (adj.); 1789 (n.); more
properly Scots-Irish (1966), from Scots (mid-14c.), the older adjective, which is from Scottis, the
northern variant of Scottish. Scots (adj.) was used in Scottish until 18c., then Scotch became
vernacular, but in mid-19c. there was a reaction against it. Scotch Tape was said to be so called
because at first it had adhesive only on the edges (to make it easier to remove as a masking tape in
car paint jobs), which was interpreted as a sign of cheapness on the part of the manufacturers.


Q

16th letter of the classical Roman alphabet, from the Phoenician equivalent of Hebrew koph, qoph,
which was used for the more guttural of the two k sounds in Semitic.    The letter existed in Greek,
but was little used and not alphabetized; the stereotypical connection with -u- began in Latin.
Anglo-Saxon scribes adopted the habit at first, but later used spellings with cw- or cu-. The qu-
pattern returned to English with the Norman Conquest and had displaced cw- by c.1300. In some
spelling variants of late Middle English, quh- also took work from wh-, especially in Scottish and
northern dialects, for example Gavin Douglas, Provost of St. Giles, in his vernacular Aeneid of
1513:    Lyk as the rois in June with hir sueit smell  The marygulde or dasy doith excell.  Quhy
suld I than, with dull forhede and vane,  With ruide engine and barrand emptive brane,  With bad
harsk speche and lewit barbour tong,  Presume to write quhar thi sueit bell is rong,  Or contirfait
sa precious wourdis deir?    Scholars use -q- alone to transliterate Semitic koph (as in Quran,
Qatar, Iraq ). In Christian theology, Q has been used since 1901 to signify the hypothetical source
of passages shared by Matthew and Luke, but not in Mark; in this sense probably it is an
abbreviation of German Quelle source.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


