vernal (adj.)

pertaining to spring, 1530s, from Late Latin vernalis of the spring, from vernus of spring, from
Latin ver the spring, spring-time, from PIE *wesr- the spring (cognates: Old Norse var spring, Greek
ear, Armenian gar-un, Sanskrit vasantah, Persian bahar, Old Church Slavonic vesna spring, Lithuanian
vasara summer).


taurine (adj.)

1610s, from Latin taurus (see Taurus) + -ine (1). In reference to a period in history, it means the
time when the sun was in Taurus at the vernal equinox (roughly 4500-1900 B.C.E.).


ver (n.)

springtime, late 14c., from Old French ver or directly from Latin ver the spring, spring-time (see
vernal).


primavera (n.)

spring, spring time, Italian, from Latin prima vera, plural of primus ver literally first spring;
see prime (adj.) + vernal. Related: Primaveral.


sidereal (adj.)

also siderial, 1630s, star-like; 1640s, of or pertaining to the stars, earlier sideral (1590s), from
French sidereal (16c.), from Latin sidereus starry, astral, of the constellations, from sidus
(genitive sideris) star, group of stars, constellation, probably from PIE root *sweid- to shine
(cognates: Lithuanian svidus shining, bright). Sidereal time is measured by the apparent diurnal
motion of the fixed stars. The sidereal day begins and ends with the passage of the vernal equinox
over the meridian and is about four minutes shorter than the solar day, measured by the passage of
the sun over the meridian.


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


