vestige (n.)

c.1600, from French vestige a mark, trace, sign (16c.), from Latin vestigium footprint, trace, of
unknown origin.


vestigial (adj.)

1850, like a mere trace of what has been, originally in biology, from vestige + -al (1).


pore (v.)

gaze intently, early 13c., of unknown origin, with no obvious corresponding word in Old French.
Perhaps from Old English *purian, suggested by spyrian to investigate, examine, and spor a trace,
vestige. Related: Pored; poring.


done

past participle of do (v.); from Old English past participle gedon (a vestige of the prefix is in
ado). U.S. Southern use of done in phrases like he done gone to the store is attested from 1827,
according to OED: a perfective auxiliary or with adverbial force in the sense 'already; completely.'
Meaning finished is early 15c. Slang done for doomed is from 1842.


investigation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French investigacion (14c.), from Latin investigationem (nominative
investigatio) a searching into, a searching for, noun of action from past participle stem of
investigare to trace out, search after, from in- in, into (see in- (2)) + vestigare to track, trace,
from vestigium footprint, track (see vestige).


swath (n.)

Old English sw&aelig;&eth;, swa&eth;u track, footstep, trace, scar, vestige, from Proto-Germanic
*swathan, *swatho (cognates: Old Frisian swethe boundary made by a scythe, Middle Dutch swade, Dutch
zwade, German Schwad a row of cut grass); of uncertain origin. Meaning a mown crop lying on the
ground is from early 14c.; that of space covered by the single cut of a scythe emerged late 15c.,
and that of a strip, lengthwise extent is from c.1600.


verse (n.)

late Old English (replacing Old English fers, an early West Germanic borrowing directly from Latin),
line or section of a psalm or canticle, later line of poetry (late 14c.), from Anglo-French and Old
French vers line of verse; rhyme, song, from Latin versus a line, row, line of verse, line of
writing, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). The metaphor is of plowing, of turning
from one line to another (vertere = to turn) as a plowman does.    Verse was invented as an aid to
memory. Later it was preserved to increase pleasure by the spectacle of difficulty overcome. That it
should still survive in dramatic art is a vestige of barbarism. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    The
English New Testament first was divided fully into verses in the Geneva version (1550s). Meaning
metrical composition is recorded from c.1300; as the non-repeating part of a modern song (between
repetitions of the chorus) by 1918.    The Negroes say that in form their old songs usually consist
in what they call Chorus and Verses. The chorus, a melodic refrain sung by all, opens the song; then
follows a verse sung as a solo, in free recitative; the chorus is repeated; then another verse;
chorus again;--and so on until the chorus, sung for the last time, ends the song. [Natalie Curtis-
Burlin, Negro Folk-Songs, 1918]


