vicarious (adj.)

1630s, taking the place of another, from Latin vicarius that supplies a place; substituted,
delegated, from vicis a change, exchange, interchange; succession, alternation, substitution, from
PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (cognates: Sanskrit visti changing, changeable; Old English wician
to give way, yield, wice wych elm; Old Norse vikja to bend, turn; Swedish viker willow twig, wand;
German wechsel change).    From 1690s as done or experienced in place of another (usually in
reference to punishment, often of Christ); from 1929 as experienced imaginatively through another.
Related: Vicariously.


vice-

word-forming element meaning deputy, assistant, substitute, also instead of, in place of, 15c., from
Latin vice in place of, ablative of vicis a change, a turn, interchange alternation (see vicarious).
In Middle English sometimes borrowed in Old French form vis-, vi-.


vicegerent (n.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin vicegerentem (nominative vicegerens), from Latin vicem, accusative of
vicus stead, place, office, (see vicarious) + gerens, present participle of gerere to carry (see
gest). From 1570s as an adjective.


vicissitude (n.)

a passing from one state to another, whether regular or not, 1560s, from Middle French vicissitude
(14c.), from Latin vicissitudinem (nominative vicissitudo) change, interchange, alternation, from
vicissim (adv.) changeably, on the other hand, by turns, in turn, from vicis a turn, change (see
vicarious). Related: Vicissitudes.


witch hazel (n.)

1540s, probably from Old English wice Applied generally or vaguely to various trees having pliant
branches [OED], from wican to bend, related to weak (see vicarious) + h&aelig;sel, used for any bush
of the pine family (see hazel (n.)). The North American bush, from which a soothing lotion is made,
was so called from 1670s. This is the source of the verb witch in dowsing.


vice versa

the order being changed, c.1600, Latin, from vice, ablative of vicis a change, alternation,
alternate order (see vicarious) + versa, feminine ablative singular of versus, past participle of
vertere to turn, turn about (see versus). The phrase has the complete force of a proposition, being
as much as to say that upon a transposition of antecedents the consequents are also transposed
[Century Dictionary].


vicar (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French vicare, Old French vicaire deputy, second in command, also in the
ecclesiastical sense (12c.), from Latin vicarius a substitute, deputy, proxy, noun use of adjective
vicarius substituted, delegated, from vicis change, interchange, succession; a place, position (see
vicarious). The original notion is of earthly representative of God or Christ; but also used in
sense of person acting as parish priest in place of a real parson (early 14c.).    The original
Vicar of Bray (in figurative use from 1660s) seems to have been Simon Allen, who held the benefice
from c.1540 to 1588, thus serving from the time of Henry VIII to Elizabeth I, being twice a Catholic
and twice a Protestant but always vicar of Bray. The village is near Maidenhead in Berkshire.


weak (adj.)

c.1300, from Old Norse veikr weak, cognate with Old English wac weak, pliant, soft, from Proto-
Germanic *waikwa- yield (cognates: Old Saxon wek, Swedish vek, Middle Dutch weec, Dutch week weak,
soft, tender, Old High German weih yielding, soft, German weich soft), from PIE root *weik- (4) to
bend, wind (see vicarious).    Sense of lacking authority is first recorded early 15c.; that of
lacking moral strength late 14c. In grammar, denoting a verb inflected by regular syllabic addition
rather than by change of the radical vowel, from 1833. Related: Weakly. Weak-kneed wanting in
resolve is from 1870.


week (n.)

Old English wucu, wice, etc., from Proto-Germanic *wikon (cognates: Old Norse vika, Old Frisian
wike, Middle Dutch weke, Old High German wecha, German woche), probably originally with the sense of
a turning or succession (compare Gothic wikon in the course of, Old Norse vika sea-mile, originally
change of oar, Old English wican yield, give way), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (see
vicarious). The vowel sound seems to have been uncertain in Old and Middle English and -e-, -i-,
-o-, -u-, -y-, and various diphthongs are attested for it.    Meaning primarily 'change,
alteration,' the word may once have denoted some earlier time division, such as the 'change of moon,
half month,' ... but there is no positive evidence of this [Buck]. No evidence of a native Germanic
week before contact with the Romans. The seven-day week is ancient, probably originating from the
28-day lunar cycle, divisible into four periods of seven day, at the end of each of which the moon
enters a new phase. Reinforced during the spread of Christianity by the ancient Jewish seven-day
week.    As a Roman astrological convention it was borrowed by other European peoples; the Germanic
tribes substituting their own deities for those of the Romans, without regard to planets. The
Coligny calendar suggests a Celtic division of the month into halves; the regular Greek division of
the month was into three decades; and the Romans also had a market week of nine days.    Greek
planetary names [for the days of the week] ... are attested for the early centuries of our era, but
their use was apparently restricted to certain circles; at any rate they never became popular. In
Rome, on the other hand, the planetary names became the established popular terms, too strongly
intrenched to be displaced by the eccl[esiastical] names, and spreading through most of western
Europe. [Buck]    Phrase a week, as in eight days a week recorded by 1540s; see a- (1).


