vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c. 1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c. 1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


rip (n.2)

thing of little value, 1815, earlier inferior or worn-out horse (1778), perhaps altered from slang
rep (1747) man of loose character; vicious, reckless and worthless person, which itself is perhaps
short for reprobate (n.).


malefic (adj.)

1650s, from Latin maleficus wicked, vicious, criminal, from male ill (see mal-) + -ficus, from stem
of facere to make, do (see factitious).


Ladino (n.)

1889, Spanish mixed with Hebrew, Arabic, and other elements, written in Hebrew characters, spoken by
Sephardim in Turkey, Greece, etc. From Spanish Ladino sagacious, cunning crafty, originally knowing
Latin, Latin, from Latin Latinus. The Spanish word also has appeared in 19c. American English in its
senses vicious horse and, in Central America, mestizo, white person.


cur (n.)

early 13c., curre, earlier kurdogge used of both vicious dogs and cowardly dogs, probably from Old
Norse kurra or Middle Low German korren both echoic, both meaning to growl. Compare Swedish
dialectal kurre, Middle Dutch corre house dog.


fell (adj.)

cruel, late 13c., possibly late Old English, perhaps from Old French fel cruel, fierce, vicious,
from Medieval Latin fello villain (see felon). Phrase at one fell swoop is from Macbeth. Related:
Fellness.


Algonquin

one of an Indian people living near the Ottawa River in Canada, 1620s, from French Algonquin,
perhaps a contraction of Algoumequin, from Micmac algoomeaking at the place of spearing fish and
eels. But Bright suggests Maliseet (Algonquian) el&aelig;gomogwik they are our relatives or allies.
Algonquian (1885) was the name taken by ethnologists to describe a large group of North American
Indian peoples, including this tribe. Algonquin Hotel (59 W. 44th St., Manhattan) opened 1902 and
named by manager Frank Case for the tribe that had lived in that area. A circle of journalists,
authors, critics, and wits began meeting there daily in 1919 and continued through the twenties;
they called themselves The Vicious Circle, but to others they became The Round Table.


dogfish (n.)

a name for various types of small shark, late 15c., dokefyche, from dog (n.) + fish (n.). Said to be
so called because they hunt in packs. This was the image of sharks in classical antiquity as well.
But in the Mediterranean, among the Greeks and Romans of antiquity, closer contact with sharks had
left an impression of vicious dogs of the sea. Thus, Pliny's canis marinus. The metaphor of the dog
spread to the North to dominate the European image of the shark, from the Italian pescecane and
French chien de mer to the German Meerhund and Hundfisch and English sea dog and dogfish. [Tom
Jones, The Xoc, the Sharke and the Sea Dogs, in Fifth Palenque Round Table, 1983, edited by Virginia
M. Field, 1985.]


affair (n.)

c. 1300, what one has to do, from Anglo-French afere, Old French afaire  business, event; rank,
estate (12c., Modern French affaire), from the infinitive phrase &agrave; faire to do, from Latin ad
to (see ad-) + facere to do, make (see factitious).    A Northern word originally, brought into
general use and given a French spelling by Caxton (15c.). General sense of vague proceedings (in
romance, war, etc.) first attested 1702. Meaning an affair of the heart; a passionate episode is
from French affaire de coeur (itself attested in English from 1809); to have an affair with someone
in this sense is by 1726, earlier have an affair of love:    'Tis manife&#383;tly contrary to the
Law of Nature, that one Woman &#383;hould cohabit or have an Affair of Love with more than one Man
at the &#383;ame time. [Pufendorf's Law of Nature and Nations, transl. J. Spavan, London, 1716]
<hr />   Thus, in our dialect, a vicious man is a man of pleasure, a sharper is one that plays the
whole game, a lady is said to have an affair, a gentleman to be a gallant, a rogue in business to be
one that knows the world. By this means, we have no such things as sots, debauchees, whores, rogues,
or the like, in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable
appellations. [George Berkeley, Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, 1732]


evil (adj.)

Old English yfel (Kentish evel) bad, vicious, ill, wicked, from Proto-Germanic *ubilaz (cognates:
Old Saxon ubil, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch evel, Dutch euvel, Old High German ubil, German
&uuml;bel, Gothic ubils), from PIE *upelo-, from root *wap- bad, evil (cognates: Hittite huwapp-
evil).    In Old English and other older Germanic languages other than Scandinavian, this word is
the most comprehensive adjectival expression of disapproval, dislike or disparagement [OED]. Evil
was the word the Anglo-Saxons used where we would use bad, cruel, unskillful, defective (adj.), or
harm (n.), crime, misfortune, disease (n.). In Middle English, bad took the wider range of senses
and evil began to focus on moral badness. Both words have good as their opposite. Evil-favored
(1520s) meant ugly. Evilchild is attested as an English surname from 13c.    The adverb is Old
English yfele, originally of words or speech. Also as a noun in Old English, what is bad; sin,
wickedness; anything that causes injury, morally or physically. Especially of a malady or disease
from c. 1200. The meaning extreme moral wickedness was one of the senses of the Old English noun,
but it did not become established as the main sense of the modern word until 18c. As a noun, Middle
English also had evilty. Related: Evilly. Evil eye (Latin oculus malus) was Old English eage yfel.
The jocular notion of an evil twin as an excuse for regrettable deeds is by 1986, American English,
from an old motif in mythology.


bad (adj.)

c. 1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c. 1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


