victuals (n.)

c.1300, vitaylle (singular), from Anglo-French and Old French vitaille food, nourishment,
provisions, from Late Latin victualia provisions, noun use of plural of victualis of nourishment,
from victus livelihood, food, sustenance, that which sustains life, from past participle stem of
vivere to live (see vital). Spelling altered early 16c. to conform with Latin, but pronunciation
remains vittles.


victual (n.)

c.1300; see victuals.


scrannel (adj.)

thin, meager, 1630s; any modern use traces to Milton (Lycidas, 124), who may have invented it out of
dialectal scranny (see scrawny). Or it might be from a Scandinavian source akin to Norwegian skran
rubbish. Compare English dialectal and Scottish skran scraps, broken victuals; refuse, in military
slang food.


victual (v.)

mid-14c., to stock or supply (a ship, garrison, etc.) with provisions to last for some time, from
Anglo-French or Old French vitaillier (12c.), from vitaille (see victuals). Related: Victualed;
victualing; Victualer; victualler.


viand (n.)

article of food, early 14c., from Anglo-French viaunde, Old French viande food (vegetable as well as
animal), victuals, provisions (11c.), dissimilated from Vulgar Latin *vivanda, from Late Latin
vivenda things for living, things to be lived upon, in classical Latin, be live, neuter plural
gerundive of vivere to live (see vital). The French word later was restricted to fresh meat.


sheriff (n.)

late Old English scirgerefa representative of royal authority in a shire, from scir (see shire) +
gerefa chief, official, reeve (see reeve). As an American county official, attested from 1660s;
sheriff's sale first recorded 1798. Sheriff's tooth (late 14c.) was a common name for the annual tax
levied to pay for the sheriff's victuals during court sessions.


found (adj.)

discovered, late 14c., past participle adjective from find (v.). Expression and found in old
advertisements for job openings, travelling berths, etc., attached to the wages or charges,
indicates that meals are provided, from the expression to find one's self to provide for one's self.
When a laborer engages to provide himself with victuals, he is said to find himself, or to receive
day wages  [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]. Hence, so much and found for wages + meals
provided.


