vigilant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French vigilant or directly from Latin vigilantem (nominative vigilans)
watchful, anxious, careful, present participle of vigilare to watch, keep awake, not to sleep, be
watchful, from vigil watchful, awake (see vigil). Related: Vigilantly.


vigilante (n.)

member of a vigilance committee, 1856, American English, from Spanish vigilante, literally watchman,
from Latin vigilantem (nominative vigilans) watchful, anxious, careful, from vigil (see vigil).
Vigilant man in same sense is attested from 1824 in a Missouri context. Vigilance committees kept
informal rough order on the U.S. frontier or in other places where official authority was imperfect.


outlook (n.)

mental view or survey, 1742, from out (adv.) + look (v.). The meaning prospect for the future is
attested from 1851. Earliest sense was a look-out (1660s). The literal sense of vigilant watch, act
or practice of looking out (1815) is rare; look-out being used instead for this.


Argus

hundred-eyed giant of Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Argos, literally the bright
one, from argos shining, bright (see argent). His epithet was Panoptes all-eyes. After his death,
Hera transferred his eyes to the peacock's tail. Used in figurative sense of very vigilant person.


watch (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ccan keep watch, be awake, from Proto-Germanic *wakjan, from PIE *weg- (2) to be
strong, lively; essentially the same word as Old English wacian be or remain awake (see wake (v.));
perhaps a Northumbrian form of it. Meaning be vigilant is from c.1200. That of to guard (someone or
some place), stand guard is late 14c. Sense of to observe, keep under observance is mid-15c.
Related: Watched; watching.


alert (adv.)

on the watch, 1590s, from French alerte vigilant (17c.), from phrase &agrave; l'erte on the watch,
from Italian all'erta to the height, from erta lookout, high tower, noun use of fem. of erto, past
participle of ergere raise up, from Latin erigere raise (see erect). The adjective is attested from
1610s, the noun from 1803, and the verb from 1868. Related: Alerted; alerting.


