vigil (n.)

c.1200, eve of a religious festival (an occasion for devotional watching or observance), from Anglo-
French and Old French vigile watch, guard; eve of a holy day (12c.), from Latin vigilia a watch,
watchfulness, from vigil watchful, awake, on the watch, alert, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or
active, be strong (cognates: Old English wacan to wake up, arise, wacian to be awake; Old High
German wahta watch, vigil; see wake (v.)). Meaning watch kept on a festival eve in English is from
late 14c.; general sense of occasion of keeping awake for some purpose is recorded from 1711.


vigilance (n.)

1560s, from Middle French vigilance (16c.), from Latin vigilantia wakefulness, watchfulness,
attention, from vigil watchful, awake (see vigil). Related: Vigilancy (1530s).


vigilante (n.)

member of a vigilance committee, 1856, American English, from Spanish vigilante, literally watchman,
from Latin vigilantem (nominative vigilans) watchful, anxious, careful, from vigil (see vigil).
Vigilant man in same sense is attested from 1824 in a Missouri context. Vigilance committees kept
informal rough order on the U.S. frontier or in other places where official authority was imperfect.


vigilant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French vigilant or directly from Latin vigilantem (nominative vigilans)
watchful, anxious, careful, present participle of vigilare to watch, keep awake, not to sleep, be
watchful, from vigil watchful, awake (see vigil). Related: Vigilantly.


surveillance (n.)

1802, from French surveillance oversight, supervision, a watch, noun of action from surveiller
oversee, watch (17c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + veiller to watch, from Latin vigilare, from
vigil watchful (see vigil). Seemingly a word that came to English from the Terror in France
(surveillance committees were formed in every French municipality in March 1793 by order of the
Convention to monitor the actions and movements of suspect persons, outsiders, and dissidents).


wake (n.2)

state of wakefulness, Old English -wacu (in nihtwacu night watch), related to watch (n.); and partly
from Old Norse vaka vigil, eve before a feast, related to vaka be awake (cognates: Old High German
wahta watch, vigil, Middle Dutch wachten to watch, guard; see wake (v.)). Meaning a sitting up at
night with a corpse is attested from early 15c. (the verb in this sense is recorded from mid-13c.;
as a noun lichwake is from late 14c.). The custom largely survived as an Irish activity. Wakeman
(c.1200), which survives as a surname, was Middle English for watchman.


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


velocity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin velocitatem (nominative velocitas) swiftness, speed, from velox (genitive
velocis) swift, speedy, rapid, quick, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to vehere carry (see
vehicle), or from the same root as vigil.


invigilate (v.)

1550s, from Latin invigilatus, past participle of invigilare watch over, be watchful, be devoted,
from in- in (see in- (2)) + vigilare (see vigil). Especially in reference to student exams. Related:
Invigilated; invigilating.


reveille (n.)

1640s, from French r&eacute;veillez-vous awaken! imperative plural of r&eacute;veiller to awaken, to
wake up, from Middle French re- again (see re-) + eveiller to rouse, from Vulgar Latin *exvigilare,
from Latin ex- out + vigilare be awake, keep watch (see vigil).


