vigor (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, energy in an activity, from Anglo-French vigour, Old French vigor force,
strength (Modern French vigueur), from Latin vigorem (nominative vigor) liveliness, activity, force,
from vigere be lively, flourish, thrive, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or active (see wake
(v.)).


vigorous (adj.)

c.1300 (early 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French vigrus, Old French vigoros strong, robust,
powerful (12c., Modern French vigoreux), from Medieval Latin vigorosus, from Latin vigere be lively,
flourish, thrive (see vigor). Related: Vigorously.


vim (n.)

1843, usually said to be from Latin vim, accusative of vis strength, force, power, vigor, energy,
from PIE root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force,
desire (see venison). But based on the early uses OED suggests the possibility that the word is of a
purely inventive or interjectional origin.


nerve (n.)

late 14c., nerf sinew, tendon, from Old French nerf and directly from Medieval Latin nervus nerve,
from Latin nervus sinew, tendon; cord, bowstring, metathesis of pre-Latin *neuros, from PIE *(s)neu-
tendon, sinew (cognates: Sanskrit snavan- band, sinew, Armenian neard sinew, Greek neuron sinew,
tendon, in Galen nerve). Sense of fibers that convey impulses between the brain and the body is from
c.1600.    Secondary senses developed from meaning strength, vigor, energy (c.1600), from the sinew
sense. Hence figurative sense of feeling, courage, first attested c.1600; that of courage, boldness
is from 1809; bad sense impudence, cheek is from 1887. Latin nervus also had a figurative sense of
vigor, force, power, strength, as did Greek neuron. From the neurological sense come Nerves
condition of nervousness, attested from 1792; to get on someone's nerves, from 1895. War of nerves
psychological warfare is from 1915.


training (n.)

mid-15c., protraction, delay, verbal noun from train (v.). From 1540s as discipline and instruction
to develop powers or skills; 1786 as exercise to improve bodily vigor. Training wheels as an
attachment to a bicycle is from 1953.


spiritless (adj.)

1560s, dead, from spirit (n.) + -less. Meaning having no vigor or vivacity is from 1650s. Related:
Spiritlessly.


nerve (v.)

c.1500, to ornament with threads; see nerve (n.). Meaning to give strength or vigor is from 1749.
Related: Nerved; nerving.


vigour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of vigor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


pep (n.)

vigor, energy, 1912, shortened form of pepper (n.), which was used in the figurative sense of
spirit, energy from at least 1847. Pep rally is attested from 1945; pep talk from 1926. To pep
(something) up is from 1925.


lusty (adj.)

early 13c., joyful, merry, from lust + -y (2). It largely has escaped the Christianization and
denigration of its root word. The sense of full of healthy vigor is from late 14c.; that of full of
desire is attested from c.1400. Related: Lustily; lustiness.


punchy (adj.2)

full of vigor, 1926, from punch (n.3) + -y (2). Related: Punchily; punchiness.


feckless (adj.)

1590s, from feck, effect, value, vigor (late 15c.), Scottish shortened form of effect, + -less.
Popularized by Carlyle, who left its opposite, feckful, in dialectal obscurity. Related: Fecklessly;
fecklessness.


vivacity (n.)

early 15c., liveliness, vigor, from Old French vivacite or directly from Latin vivacitatem
(nominative vivacitas) vital force, liveliness, from vivax (genitive vivacis) lively, also long-
lived, from vivere to live (see vital).


brio (n.)

liveliness, vivacity, 1734, from Italian brio, literally mettle, fire, life, perhaps a shortened
derivative of Latin ebrius drunk. Or via Proven&ccedil;al briu vigor, from Celtic *brig-o- strength,
from PIE *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)). Probably entered English via musical instruction con
brio.


invigorate (v.)

1640s, from in- (2) + vigor + -ate (2). Earlier verb was envigor (1610s). Related: Invigorated;
invigorating.


ultra vires

Latin, literally beyond powers, from ultra (see ultra-) + vires strength, force, vigor, power,
plural of vis. Usually beyond the legal or constitutional power of a court, etc.


verve (n.)

1690s, special talent in writing, enthusiasm in what pertains to art and literature, from French
verve enthusiasm (especially pertaining to the arts), in Old French caprice, odd humor, proverb,
saying; messenger's report (12c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *verva, from Latin verba (whimsical)
words, plural of verbum word (see verb). Meaning mental vigor is first recorded 1803.


racy (adj.)

1650s, having a characteristic taste (of wines, fruits, etc.), from race (n.2) in its older sense of
flavor or in the sense class of wines + -y (2); meaning having a quality of vigor (1660s) led to
that of improper, risqu&eacute;, first recorded 1901, probably reinforced by phrase racy of the soil
earthy (1870). Related: Racily; raciness.


Evan

masc. proper name, Welsh form of John, form influenced perhaps by Welsh ieuanc young man (cognate of
Latin juvenis), from Celtic *yowanko-, from PIE *yeu- vital force, youthful vigor (see young).


heyday (n.)

late 16c., alteration of heyda (1520s), exclamation of playfulness or surprise, something like
Modern English hurrah, apparently an extended form of Middle English interjection hey or hei (see
hey). Modern sense of stage of greatest vigor first recorded 1751, which altered the spelling on
model of day, with which this word apparently has no etymological connection.


recuperation (n.)

late 15c., recovery or regaining of things, from Latin recuperationem (nominative recuperatio) a
getting back, regaining, recovery, noun of action from past participle stem of recuperare get back,
regain, get again, in Medieval Latin revive, convalesce, recover, related to recipere (see receive).
Meaning restoration to health or vigor is from 1865.


neuro-

before vowels neur-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to a nerve or nerves or the nervous
system, from Greek neuro-, comb. form of neuron nerve, originally sinew, tendon, cord, bowstring,
also strength, vigor, from PIE *(s)neu- tendon, sinew (see nerve).


violation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French violacion and directly from Latin violationem (nominative violatio) an
injury, irreverence, profanation, from past participle stem of violare to treat with violence,
outrage, dishonor, perhaps an irregular derivative of vis strength, force, power, energy, from PIE
root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force, desire
(see venison).


animosity (n.)

early 15c., vigor, from Middle French animosit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin animositatem
(nominative animositas) boldness, vehemence, from animosus bold, spirited, from animus (see animus).
Sense of hostile feeling is first recorded c.1600, from a secondary sense in Latin (see animus).


invitation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin invitationem (nominative invitatio) an invitation, incitement, challenge, noun
of action from past participle stem of invitare invite, treat, entertain, originally be pleasant
toward, from in- toward (see in- (2)). Second element is obscure; Watkins suggests a suffixed form
of root *weie- to go after something, pursue with vigor, and a connection to English gain (see
venison). Meaning the spoken or written form in which a person is invited is from 1610s.


impetus (n.)

early 15c., impetous rapid movement, rush; 1640s, with modern spelling, force with which a body
moves, driving force, from Latin impetus attack, assault, onset, impulse, violence, vigor, force,
passion, related to impetere to attack, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in-
(2)) + petere aim for, rush at (see petition (n.)).


orgasm (n.)

1680s, sexual climax, from French orgasme or Modern Latin orgasmus, from Greek orgasmos excitement,
swelling, from organ be in heat, become ripe for, literally to swell, be excited, related to orge
impulse, excitement, anger, from PIE root *wrog- to burgeon, swell with strength (cognates: Sanskrit
urja a nourishment, sap, vigor, Old Irish ferc, ferg anger). Also used 17c. of other violent
excitements of emotion or other bodily functions.


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


strength (n.)

Old English streng&thorn;u, streng&#240; bodily power, force, vigor, firmness, fortitude, manhood,
violence, moral resistance, from Proto-Germanic *strangitho (cognates: Old High German strengida
strength), from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow (see string (n.)), with Proto-Germanic abstract noun
suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Compare length/long. From the same root as strong,


earnest (adj.)

from Old English eornoste (adj.) zealous, or from Old English noun eornost seriousness, serious
intent (surviving only in the phrase in earnest), from Proto-Germanic *ern vigor, briskness
(cognates: Old Saxon ernust, Old High German arnust seriousness, firmness, struggle, German Ernst
seriousness; Gothic arniba safely, securely; Old Norse ern able, vigorous, jarna fight, combat). The
proper name Ernest (literally resolute) is from the same root. Related: Earnestly; earnestness.


constitution (n.)

mid-14c., law, regulation, edict, from Old French constitucion (12c.) constitution, establishment,
and directly from Latin constitutionem (nominative constitutio) act of settling, settled condition,
anything arranged or settled upon, regulation, order, ordinance, from constitut-, past participle
stem of constituere (see constitute).    Meaning action of establishing is from 1580s; that of way
in which a thing is constituted is from c.1600; that of physical health, strength and vigor of the
body is from 1550s; of the mind, temperament, character from 1580s. Sense of mode of organization of
a state is from c.1600; that of system of principles by which a community is governed dates from
1730s; especially of a document of written laws since the U.S. and French constitutions, late 18c.


gain (v.)

1520s, from Middle French gagner, from Old French gaaignier to earn, gain; trade; capture, win, also
work in the fields, cultivate land, from Frankish *waidanjan hunt, forage, also graze, pasture, from
Proto-Germanic *wartho hunting ground (cognates: Old English wa&thorn; hunting, German Weide
pasture, pasturage, Old Norse vei&eth;r hunting, catch of fish), from PIE *weie- to strive after,
pursue with vigor, desire (see venison). Related: Gained; gaining; gainer. To gain on advance nearer
is from 1719. To gain ground (1620s) was originally military.


smart (adj.)

late Old English smeart painful, severe, stinging; causing a sharp pain, related to smeortan (see
smart (v.)). Meaning executed with force and vigor is from c.1300. Meaning quick, active, clever is
attested from c.1300, from the notion of cutting wit, words, etc., or else keen in bargaining.
Meaning trim in attire first attested 1718, ascending from the kitchen to the drawing-room c.1880
[Weekley]. For sense evolution, compare sharp (adj.).    In reference to devices, the sense of
behaving as though guided by intelligence (as in smart bomb) first attested 1972. Smarts good sense,
intelligence, is first recorded 1968. Smart cookie is from 1948.


vegetable (adj.)

early 15c., capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous; also neither animal nor mineral, of the
plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant, from Old French vegetable living, fit to live, and
directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis growing, flourishing, from Late Latin vegetabilis
animating, enlivening, from Latin vegetare to enliven, from vegetus vigorous, enlivened, active,
sprightly, from vegere to be alive, active, to quicken, from PIE *weg- (2) be strong, lively, source
of watch (v.), vigor, velocity, and possibly witch (see wake (v.)). The meaning resembling that of a
vegetable, dull, uneventful; having life such as a plant has is attested from 1854 (see vegetable
(n.)).


lead (n.1)

heavy metal, Old English lead, from West Germanic *loudhom (cognates: Old Frisian lad, Middle Dutch
loot, Dutch lood lead, German Lot weight, plummet). The name and the skill in using the metal seem
to have been borrowed from the Celts (compare Old Irish luaide), probably from PIE root *plou(d)- to
flow.    Figurative of heaviness since at least early 14c. Black lead was an old name for graphite,
hence lead pencil (1680s) and the colloquial figurative phrase to have lead in one's pencil be
possessed of (especially male sexual) vigor, attested by 1902. Lead balloon a failure, American
English slang, attested by 1957 (as a type of something heavy that can be kept up only with effort,
from 1904). Lead-footed slow is from 1896; opposite sense of fast emerged 1940s in trucker's jargon,
from notion of a foot heavy on the gas pedal.


young (adj.)

Old English geong youthful, young; recent, new, fresh, from Proto-Germanic *juwunga- (cognates: Old
Saxon and Old Frisian jung, Old Norse ungr, Middle Dutch jonc, Dutch jong, Old High German and
German jung, Gothic juggs), from PIE *yuwn-ko-, suffixed form of root *yeu- vital force, youthful
vigor (cognates: Sanskrit yuva young, Latin juvenis young, Lithuanian jaunas, Old Church Slavonic
junu, Russian junyj young, Old Irish oac, Welsh ieuanc young).    From c.1830-1850, Young France,
Young Italy, etc., were loosely applied to republican agitators in various monarchies; also,
especially in Young England, Young America, used generally for typical young person of the nation.
For Young Turk, see Turk.


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


youth (n.)

Old English geogu&eth; youth; young people, junior warriors; young of cattle, related to geong
young, from Proto-Germanic *jugunthi- (cognates: Old Saxon juguth, Old Frisian jogethe, Middle Dutch
joghet, Dutch jeugd, Old High German jugund, German Jugend, Gothic junda youth), from suffixed form
of PIE root *yeu- vital force, youthful vigor (see young (adj.)) + Proto-Germanic abstract noun
suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    According to OED, the Proto-Germanic form apparently was altered
from *juwunthiz by influence of its contrast, *dugunthiz ability (source of Old English dugu&eth;).
In Middle English, the medial -g- became a yogh, which then disappeared.  They said that age was
truth, and that the youngMarred with wild hopes the peace of slavery[Shelley]


virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


power (n.)

c.1300, ability; ability to act or do; strength, vigor, might, especially in battle; efficacy;
control, mastery, lordship, dominion; legal power or authority; authorization; military force, an
army, from Anglo-French pouair, Old French povoir, noun use of the infinitive, to be able, earlier
podir (9c.), from Vulgar Latin *potere, from Latin potis powerful (see potent).    Whatever some
hypocritical ministers of government may say about it, power is the greatest of all pleasures. It
seems to me that only love can beat it, and love is a happy illness that can't be picked up as
easily as a Ministry. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Meaning one who has power is late 14c. Meaning
specific ability or capacity is from early 15c. Meaning a state or nation with regard to
international authority or influence [OED] is from 1726. Used for a large number of from 1660s.
Meaning energy available for work is from 1727. Sense of electrical supply is from 1896.    Phrase
the powers that be is from Rom. xiii:1. As a statement wishing good luck, more power to (someone) is
recorded from 1842. A power play in ice hockey so called by 1940. Power failure is from 1911; power
steering from 1921.


un- (1)

prefix of negation, Old English un-, from Proto-Germanic *un- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old
High German, German un-, Gothic un-, Dutch on-), from PIE *n- (source of Sanskrit a-, an- not, Greek
a-, an-, Old Irish an-, Latin in-), comb. form of PIE root *ne not (cognates: Avestan na, Old Church
Slavonic and Lithuanian ne not, Latin ne that not, Greek ne- not, Old Irish ni, Cornish ny not).
Often euphemistic (such as untruth for lie).     The most prolific of English prefixes, freely and
widely used in Old English, where it forms more than 1,000 compounds. It underwent a mass extinction
in early Middle English, but emerged with renewed vigor 16c. to form compounds with native and
imported words. It disputes with Latin-derived cognate in- (1) the right to form the negation of
certain words (indigestable/undigestable, etc.), and though both might be deployed in cooperation to
indicate shades of meaning (unfamous/infamous), typically they are not.    It also makes words from
phrases (such as uncalled-for, c.1600; undreamed-of, 1630s; uncome-at-able, 1690s; unputdownable,
1947, of a book; un-in-one-breath-utterable, Ben Jonson; etc., but the habit is not restricted to
un-; such as put-up-able-with, 1812). As a prefix in telegramese to replace not and save the cost of
a word, it is attested by 1936.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


