Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


Guernsey

breed of cattle, 1834, from the Channel Island where it was bred; the island name is Viking. Like
neighboring Jersey, it was also taken as the name for a coarse, close-fitting vest of wool (1839),
and in Australia the word supplies many of the usages of jersey in U.S. The second element of the
name is Old Norse ey island; the first element uncertain, traditionally meaning green, but perhaps
rather representing a Viking personal name, such as Grani.


Dane (n.)

native of Denmark, from Danish Daner (replacing Old English Dene (plural)); used in Old English of
Northmen generally. Perhaps ultimately from a source related to Old High German tanar sand bank, in
reference to their homeland; or from Proto-Germanic *den- low ground, for the same reason.
Applied 1774 to a breed of large dogs. Danegeld not known by that name in Old English, or until
1086, long after the end of the Viking depredations. Supposedly originally a tax to pay for
protection from the Northmen (either to outfit defensive armies or to buy peace). Danelaw (c.1050)
was the Danish law in force over that large part of England under Viking rule after c.878; the
application to the land itself is modern (1837).


Reykjavik

capital of Iceland, literally bay of smoke, from Old Norse reykja to smoke (see reek (n.)) + vik bay
(see viking). So called from the natural hot springs there. Settlement said to date from 9c., but
not established as a town until 1786.


skald (n.)

Scandinavian poet and singer of medieval times, 1763, from Old Norse skald skald, poet (9c.), of
unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *sekw- (3) to say, utter. The modern word is an antiquarian
revival. Usually applied to Norwegian and Icelandic poets of the Viking period and down to c 1250,
but often without any clear idea as to their function and the character of their work [OED].
Related: Scaldic.


riding (n.2)

one of the three districts into which Yorkshire was divided, late 13c., from late Old English
*&thorn;ri&eth;ing, a relic of Viking rule, from Old Norse &eth;ri&eth;jungr third part, from
&eth;ri&eth;i third (see third). The initial consonant merged with final consonant of preceding
north, west, or east.


jersey (n.)

1580s as a type of knitted cloth; 1842 as a breed of cattle; both from Jersey, one of the Channel
Islands. Its name is said to be a corruption of Latin Caesarea, the Roman name for the island (or
another near it), influenced by Old English ey island; but perhaps rather a Viking name (perhaps
meaning Geirr's island). The meaning woolen knitted close-fitting tunic, especially one worn during
sporting events, is from 1836.


Scarborough

place in Yorkshire, earlier Scar&#240;abork, etc., apparently a viking name, from Old Norse and
meaning fortified place of a man called Skarthi, identified in old chronicles as Thorgils Skarthi,
literally Thorgils Harelip, from Old Norse skart&#240; notch, hack (in the edge of a thing);
mountain pass. It has been noted that a literal reading of the name as gap-hill suits the location.
Scarborough warning short notice or none is from 1540s.


Skraeling (n.)

1767, Norse name for inhabitants of Greenland encountered by the Viking settlers there, from Old
Norse Skr&aelig;ingjar (plural), apparently literally little men (compare Icelandic skr&aelig;lna
shrink); another term for them was smair menn. The name may have been used first in reference to the
inhabitants of Vineland (who would have been Indians), then transferred to Eskimos, who adopted it
into their own language as Kalaleq.  Hans Egede, who published a dictionary of Greenland Eskimo in
1739, says that the Eskimos themselves told him that they got the name from the Norsemen who once
lived in Greenland. [Gordon, p.217-8]


navy (n.)

early 14c., fleet of ships, especially for purposes of war, from Old French navie fleet; ship, from
Latin navigia, plural of navigium vessel, boat, from navis ship (see naval). Meaning a nation's
collective, organized sea power is from 1530s. The Old English words were sciphere (usually of
Viking invaders) and scipfierd (usually of the home defenses). Navy blue was the color of the
British naval uniform. Navy bean attested from 1856, so called because they were grown to be used by
the Navy.


eleven (n.)

c.1200, elleovene, from Old English enleofan, endleofan, literally one left (over ten), from Proto-
Germanic *ainlif- (compare Old Saxon elleban, Old Frisian andlova, Dutch elf, Old High German
einlif, German elf, Old Norse ellifu, Gothic ainlif), a compound of *ain one (see one) + PIE *leikw-
leave, remain (source of Greek leipein to leave behind; see relinquish).  FIREFLY: Give me a number
from 1 to 10.CHICOLINI: eleven! FIREFLY: Right!  Viking survivors who escaped an Anglo-Saxon victory
were daro&thorn;a laf the leavings of spears, while hamora laf the leavings of hammers was an Old
English kenning for swords (both from The Battle of Brunanburgh). Twelve reflects the same
formation. Outside Germanic the only instance of this formation is in Lithuanian, which uses -lika
left over and continues the series to 19 (vienio-lika eleven, dvy-lika twelve, try-lika thirteen,
keturio-lika fourteen, etc.). Meaning a team or side in cricket or football is from 1743.


murder (n.)

c.1300, murdre, from Old English mor&eth;or (plural mor&thorn;ras) secret killing of a person,
unlawful killing, also mortal sin, crime; punishment, torment, misery, from Proto-Germanic *murthra-
(cognates: Goth maur&thorn;r, and, from a variant form of the same root, Old Saxon morth, Old
Frisian morth, Old Norse mor&eth;, Middle Dutch moort, Dutch moord, German Mord murder), from PIE
*mrtro-, from root *mer- to die (see mortal (adj.)). The spelling with -d- probably reflects
influence of Anglo-French murdre, from Old French mordre, from Medieval Latin murdrum, from the
Germanic root.    Viking custom, typical of Germanic, distinguished mor&eth; (Old Norse) secret
slaughter, from vig (Old Norse) slaying. The former involved concealment, or slaying a man by night
or when asleep, and was a heinous crime. The latter was not a disgrace, if the killer acknowledged
his deed, but he was subject to vengeance or demand for compensation.Mordre wol out that se we day
by day. [Chaucer, Nun's Priest's Tale, c.1386]Weakened sense of very unpleasant situation is from
1878.


troll (n.1)

supernatural being in Scandinavian mythology and folklore, 1610s (with an isolated use mid-14c.),
from Old Norse troll giant being not of the human race, evil spirit, monster. Some speculate that it
originally meant creature that walks clumsily, and derives from Proto-Germanic *truzlan, from
*truzlanan (see troll (v.)). But it seems to have been a general supernatural word, such as Swedish
trolla to charm, bewitch; Old Norse trolldomr witchcraft.    The old sagas tell of the troll-bull, a
supernatural being in the form of a bull, as well as boar-trolls. There were troll-maidens, troll-
wives, and troll-women; the trollman, a magician or wizard, and the troll-drum, used in Lappish
magic rites. The word was popularized in literary English by 19c. antiquarians, but it has been
current in the Shetlands and Orkneys since Viking times. The first record of the word in modern
English is from a court document from the Shetlands, regarding a certain Catherine, who, among other
things, was accused of airt and pairt of witchcraft and sorcerie, in hanting and seeing the Trollis
ryse out of the kyrk yeard of Hildiswick.    Originally conceived as a race of malevolent giants,
they have suffered the same fate as the Celtic Danann and by 19c. were regarded by peasants in in
Denmark and Sweden as dwarfs and imps supposed to live in caves or under the ground.    They are
obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and elsewise keeping up a friendly
intercourse with mankind. But they have a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions,
but even women and children. [Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, London, 1850]


