vile (adj.)

late 13c., morally repugnant; morally flawed, corrupt, wicked; of no value; of inferior quality;
disgusting, foul, ugly; degrading, humiliating; of low estate, without worldly honor or esteem, from
Anglo-French ville, Old French vil shameful, dishonorable; low-born; cheap; ugly, hideous, from
Latin vilis cheap, worthless, base, common, of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *wes- (1) to
buy, sell (see venal). Related: Vilely; vileness; vilety (early 13c.).


revile (v.)

c.1300, from Old French reviler consider vile, despise, scorn, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-),
+ aviler make vile or cheap, disesteem, from vil (see vile). Related: Reviled; reviling.


scrap (n.2)

fight, 1846, possibly a variant of scrape (n.1) on the notion of an abrasive encounter. Weekley and
OED suggest obsolete colloquial scrap scheme, villainy, vile intention (1670s).


casket (n.)

mid-15c., small box for jewels, etc., possibly a diminutive of English cask, or from a corruption of
Middle French casset (see cassette). Meaning coffin is American English, probably euphemistic,
attested by 1832.Caskets! a vile modern phrase, which compels a person ... to shrink ... from the
idea of being buried at all. [Hawthorne, Our Old Home, 1863]


lewd (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;wede nonclerical, of uncertain origin but probably ultimately from Vulgar Latin
*laigo-, from Latin laicus (see lay (adj.)). Sense of unlettered, uneducated (early 13c.) descended
to coarse, vile, lustful by late 14c. Related: Lewdly; lewdness.


turpitude (n.)

depravity, infamy, late 15c., from Middle French turpitude (early 15c.), from Latin turpitudinem
(nominative turpitudo) baseness, from turpis vile, physically ugly, base, unsightly, figuratively
morally ugly, scandalous, shameful, of unknown origin. Klein suggests perhaps originally what one
turns away from (compare Latin trepit he turns).


vilify (v.)

mid-15c., to lower in worth or value, from Late Latin vilificare to make cheap or base; to esteem of
little value, from Latin vilis cheap, base (see vile) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning to slander, speak evil of is first recorded 1590s. Related: Vilified, vilifying.


sordid (adj.)

early 15c., festering, from Latin sordidus dirty, filthy, foul, vile, mean, base, from sordere be
dirty, be shabby, related to sordes dirt, filth, from PIE *swrd-e-, from root *swordo- black, dirty
(cognates: Old English sweart black). Sense of foul, low, mean first recorded 1610s. Related:
Sordidly; sordidness.


file (n.2)

metal tool, Old English feol (Mercian fil), from Proto-Germanic *finkhlo (cognates: Old Saxon and
Old High German fila, Middle Dutch vile, Dutch vijl, German Feile), probably from PIE *peig- (1) to
cut, mark by incision (see paint (v.)). The verb in this sense is from early 13c., from Old English
filian. Related: Filed; filing.


brothel (n.)

bawdy house, 1590s, shortened from brothel-house, from brothel prostitute (late 15c.), earlier vile,
worthless person of either sex (14c.), from Old English bro&eth;en past participle of breo&eth;an
deteriorate, go to ruin, from Proto-Germanic *breuthan to be broken up, related to *breutan to break
(see brittle). In 16c. brothel-house was confused with unrelated bordel (see bordello) and the word
shifted meaning from a person to a place.


wretch (n.)

Old English wrecca wretch, stranger, exile, from Proto-Germanic *wrakjon pursuer; one pursued
(cognates: Old Saxon wrekkio, Old High German reckeo a banished person, exile, German recke renowned
warrior, hero), related to Old English wreccan to drive out, punish (see wreak). The contrast in the
development of the meaning in Eng. and German is remarkable [OED]. Sense of vile, despicable person
developed in Old English, reflecting the sorry state of the outcast, as presented in Anglo-Saxon
verse (such as The Wanderer). Compare German Elend misery, from Old High German elilenti sojourn in
a foreign land, exile.


hedge (n.)

Old English hecg, originally any fence, living or artificial, from West Germanic *khagja (cognates:
Middle Dutch hegge, Dutch heg, Old High German hegga, German Hecke hedge), from PIE *kagh- to catch,
seize; wickerwork, fence (cognates: Latin caulae a sheepfold, enclosure, Gaulish caio
circumvallation, Welsh cae fence, hedge). Related to Old English haga enclosure, hedge (see haw).
Figurative sense of boundary, barrier is from mid-14c. Prefixed to any word, it notes something
mean, vile, of the lowest class [Johnson], from contemptuous attributive sense of plying one's trade
under a hedge (hedge-priest, hedge-lawyer, hedge-wench, etc.), a usage attested from 1530s.


turd (n.)

Old English tord piece of excrement, from Proto-Germanic *turdam (cognates: Middle Dutch torde piece
of excrement, Old Norse tord-yfill, Dutch tort-wevel dung beetle), from PIE *drtom, past participle
of root *der- (2) to split, peel, flay, tear; thus that which is separated (torn off) from the body
(compare shit (v.) from root meaning to split; Greek skatos from root meaning to cut off; see
scatology). As a type of something worthless and vile, it is attested from mid-13c. Meaning
despicable person is recorded from mid-15c.    A tord ne yeue ic for eu alle [The Owl and the
Nightingale, c.1250]   <hr />   Alle thingis ... I deme as toordis, that I wynne Crist. [Wyclif,
Phil. iii.8, 1382; KJV has I count all things ... but dung, that I may win Christ]


crap (v.)

defecate, 1846, from one of a cluster of words generally applied to things cast off or discarded
(such as weeds growing among corn (early 15c.), residue from renderings (late 15c.), underworld
slang for money (18c.), and in Shropshire, dregs of beer or ale), all probably from Middle English
crappe grain that was trodden underfoot in a barn, chaff (mid-15c.), from Middle French crape
siftings, from Old French crappe, from Medieval Latin crappa, crapinum chaff.  Related: Crapped;
crapping.    Despite folk etymology insistence, not from Thomas Crapper (1837-1910) who was,
however, a busy plumber and may have had some minor role in the development of modern toilets. The
name Crapper is a northern form of Cropper (attested from 1221), an occupational surname, obviously,
but the exact reference is unclear. Crap (v.) as a variant of crop (v.) was noted early 19c, as a
peculiarity of speech in Scotland and the U.S. Southwest (Arkansas, etc.).    Draw out yere sword,
thou vile South'ron!  Red wat wi' blude o' my kin!  That sword it crapped the bonniest flower  E'er
lifted its head to the sun!   [Allan Cunningham (1784-1842), The Young Maxwell]


foul (adj.)

Old English ful rotten, unclean, vile, corrupt, offensive to the senses, from Proto-Germanic *fulaz
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian ful, Middle Dutch voul, Dutch vuil, Old High German f&uuml;l,
German faul, Gothic f&uuml;ls), from root *fu-, corresponding to PIE *pu-, perhaps from the sound
made in reaction to smelling something bad (compare Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih foul,
rotten; Greek puon discharge from a sore; Latin pus putrid matter, putere to stink, putridus rotten;
Lithuanian puviu to rot).  Old English ful occasionally meant ugly (as contrasted with f&aelig;ger
(adj.), modern fair (adj.)), a sense frequently found in Middle English, and the cognate in Swedish
is the usual word for ugly. Of weather, first recorded late 14c. In the sporting sense of irregular,
unfair it is first attested 1797, though foul play is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of out
of play attested by 1860. Foulmart was a Middle English word for polecat (from Old English mear&eth;
marten).


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


