vindicate (v.)

1620s, to avenge or revenge, from Latin vindicatus, past participle of vindicare to stake a claim;
to liberate; to act as avenger (see vindication). Meaning to clear from censure or doubt, by means
of demonstration is recorded from 1630s. Related: Vindicated, vindicating.


vindicatory (adj.)

1640s, serving to justify, tending to vindicate; 1650s, avenging, from vindicate + -ory.


vindicative (adj.)

mid-15c., vindictive, having vengeful intent, from Old French vindicatif (14c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin vindicativus, from vindicat-, past participle stem of vindicare (see vindicate). From
c.1600 as involving retribution or punishment, a sense common in 17th cent. [OED].


venge (v.)

avenge, c.1300, from Old French vengier revenge, avenge, punish, from Latin vindicare avenge,
vindicate (see vindication). Related: Venged; venging.


vengeance (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French vengeaunce, Old French vengeance, venjance revenge, retribution (12c.),
from vengier take revenge, from Latin vindicare assert a claim, claim as one's own; avenge, punish
(see vindicate).  Vengeance is mine, ... saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. [Paul to
the Romans, xii:19-20]


avenge (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French avenger, Old French avengier, from a- to (see ad-) + vengier take
revenge (Modern French venger), from Latin vindicare to claim, avenge, punish (see vindicate).
Related: Avenged; avenging.


Boeotian (adj.)

1590s, ignorant, dull, from Boeotia, district around Thebes in ancient Greece (said to have been so
called for its cattle pastures; Greek bous = ox), whose inhabitants were characterized as
proverbially dull and countrified by their neighbors, the Athenians. The Boeotians presumably held
reciprocal opinions, but their great writers, Plutarch and Pindar, though patriots, are full of
praise for Athenian deeds and institutions.    Though his aim was to vindicate Boeotia, [Pindar] has
probably done her a disservice, in that he has helped to immortalise the scurrilous proverb
&#914;&#959;&#953;&#969;&#964;&#943;&#945; &#973;&#962;, which he wished to confute. ... If left to
itself, the slander might have passed into oblivion long ago. [W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient
Boeotians, 1895]


revenge (v.)

late 14c., from Old French revengier, variant of revenchier take revenge, avenge (13c., Modern
French revancher), from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + vengier take revenge, from Latin
vindicare to lay claim to, avenge, punish (see vindicate).To avenge is to get revenge or to take
vengeance; it suggests the administration of just punishment for a criminal or immoral act. Revenge
seems to stress the idea of retaliation a bit more strongly and implies real hatred as its
motivation. [The Columbia Guide to Standard American English, 1993]


purge (v.)

c.1300, clear of a charge or suspicion; late 14c., cleanse, clear, purify, from Anglo-French purger,
Old French purgier wash, clean; refine, purify morally or physically (12c., Modern French purger)
and directly from Latin purgare cleanse, make clean; purify, especially of the body, free from what
is superfluous; remove, clear away, figuratively refute, justify, vindicate (also source of Spanish
purgar, Italian purgare), from Old Latin purigare, from purus pure (see pure) + root of agere to
drive, make (see act (n.)). Related: Purged; purging.


say (v.)

Old English secgan to utter, inform, speak, tell, relate, from Proto-Germanic *sagjanan (cognates:
Old Saxon seggian, Old Norse segja, Danish sige, Old Frisian sedsa, Middle Dutch segghen, Dutch
zeggen, Old High German sagen, German sagen to say), from PIE *sokwyo-, from root *sekw- (3) to say,
utter (cognates: Hittite shakiya- to declare, Lithuanian sakyti to say, Old Church Slavonic sociti
to vindicate, show, Old Irish insce speech, Old Latin inseque to tell say).    Past tense said
developed from Old English segde. Not attested in use with inanimate objects (clocks, signs, etc.)
as subjects before 1930. You said it you're right first recorded 1919; you can say that again as a
phrase expressing agreement is recorded from 1942, American English. You don't say (so) as an
expression of astonishment (often ironic) is first recorded 1779, American English.


