violate (v.)

early 15c., to break (an oath, etc.), from Latin violatus, past participle of violare treat with
violence, dishonor, outrage (see violation). Sense of ravish is first recorded mid-15c. Related:
Violated; violating.


rape (v.)

late 14c., seize prey; abduct, take by force, from rape (n.) and from Anglo-French raper (Old French
rapir) to seize, abduct, a legal term, probably from past participle of Latin rapere seize, carry
off by force, abduct (see rapid).    Latin rapere was used for sexually violate, but only very
rarely; the usual Latin word being stuprare to defile, ravish, violate, related to stuprum (n.),
literally disgrace. Meaning to abduct (a woman), ravish; also seduce (a man) is from early 15c. in
English. Related: Raped; raping. Uncertain connection to Low German and Dutch rapen in the same
sense.


violative (adj.)

tending to or causing violation, 1765, from violate + -ive.


Priscian (n.)

Latin Priscianus, name of a celebrated Roman grammarian (c.500-530); hence to break Priscian's head
(1520s) to violate rules of grammar (Latin diminuere Prisciani caput). See Priscilla.


profane (v.)

late 14c., from Old French profaner, prophaner (13c.) and directly from Latin profanare to
desecrate, render unholy, violate, from profanus unholy, not consecrated (see profane (adj.)).
Related: Profaned; profaning.


infringe (v.)

mid-15c., enfrangen, to violate, from Latin infringere to damage, break off, break, bruise, from in-
in (see in- (2)) + frangere to break (see fraction). Meaning of encroach first recorded c.1760.
Related: Infringed; infringing.


offend (v.)

early 14c., to sin against (someone), from Old French ofendre transgress, antagonize, and directly
from Latin offendere to hit, strike against, figuratively to stumble, commit a fault, displease,
trespass against, provoke, from ob against (see ob-) + -fendere to strike (found only in compounds;
see defend).    Meaning to violate (a law), to make a moral false step, to commit a crime is from
late 14c. Meaning to wound the feelings is from late 14c. The literal sense of to attack, assail is
attested from late 14c.; this has been lost in Modern English, but is preserved in offense and
offensive. Related: Offended; offending.


trespass (v.)

c.1300, transgress in some active manner, commit an aggressive offense, to sin, from Old French
trespasser pass beyond or across, cross, traverse; infringe, violate, from tres- beyond (from Latin
trans-; see trans-) + passer go by, pass (see pass (v.)). Meaning enter unlawfully is first attested
in forest laws of Scottish Parliament (c.1455). The Modern French descendant of Old French
trespasser, tr&eacute;passer, has come to be used euphemistically for to die (compare euphemistic
use of cross over, and obituary). Related: Trespassed; trespassing.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


break (v.)

Old English brecan to break, shatter, burst; injure, violate, destroy, curtail; break into, rush
into; burst forth, spring out; subdue, tame (class IV strong verb; past tense br&aelig;c, past
participle brocen), from Proto-Germanic *brekan (cognates: Old Frisian breka, Dutch breken, Old High
German brehhan, German brechen, Gothic brikan), from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Most
modern senses were in Old English. In reference to the heart from early 13c. Meaning to disclose is
from early 13c.   Break bread share food (with) is from late 14c. Break the ice is c.1600, in
reference to the coldness of encounters of strangers. Break wind first attested 1550s. To break
(something) out (1890s) probably is an image from dock work, of freeing cargo before unloading it.
Ironic theatrical good luck formula break a leg has parallels in German Hals- und Beinbruch break
your neck and leg, and Italian in bocca al lupo. Evidence of a highly superstitious craft (see
Macbeth).


