viper (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French vipere, earlier in English as vipera (c.1200), directly from Latin
vipera viper, snake, serpent, contraction of *vivipera, from vivus alive, living (see vital) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). In common with many snake species in cooler climates, in most
cases the viper's eggs are kept inside the mother until hatching.    Applied to persons of spiteful
character since at least 1590s. The only venomous snake found in Great Britain, but not especially
dangerous. The word replaced native adder. The flesh of the viper was formerly regarded as
possessing great nutritive or restorative properties, and was frequently used medicinally [OED];
hence viper-wine, wine medicated with some kind of extract from vipers, used 17c. by gray-bearded
gallants in a bid to feele new lust, and youthfull flames agin. [Massinger]


viperine (adj.)

1540s, from Latin viperinus pertaining to a viper or vipers, from vipera (see viper).


wyvern (n.)

c.1600, formed (with excrescent -n) from Middle English wyver (c.1300), from Anglo-French wivre,
from Old North French form of Old French guivre snake, from Latin vipera viper (see viper). In
heraldry, a winged dragon with eagle's feet and a serpent's barbed tail.


asp (n.)

poisonous snake, 1520s, earlier aspis (mid-14c.), from Old French aspe asp (13c.) or directly from
Latin aspidem (nominative aspis), from Greek aspis an asp, Egyptian viper, literally shield; the
serpent so called probably in reference to its neck hood.


viviparous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin viviparus bringing forth alive, from Latin vivus alive, living (see vivid) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). See viper.


echidna (n.)

Australian egg-laying hedgehog-like mammal, 1847, usually explained as from Greek ekhidna snake,
viper, from ekhis snake, from PIE *angwhi- snake, eel (cognates: Norwegian igle, Old High German
egala, German Egel leech, Latin anguis serpent, snake).    But this sense is difficult to reconcile
with this animal (unless it is a reference to the ant-eating tongue), and the name seems more
properly to belong to Latin echinus, Greek ekhinos sea-urchin, originally hedgehog (in Greek also
sharp points), which Watkins explains as snake-eater, from ekhis snake.


adder (n.)

Old English n&aelig;ddre a snake, serpent, viper, from Proto-Germanic *n&aelig;dro a snake
(cognates: Old Norse na&eth;ra, Middle Dutch nadre, Old High German natra, German Natter, Gothic
nadrs), from PIE root *netr- (cognates: Latin natrix water snake, probably by folk-association with
nare to swim; Old Irish nathir, Welsh neidr adder).    The modern form represents a faulty
separation 14c.-16c. into an adder, for which see also apron, auger, nickname, humble pie, umpire.
Nedder is still a northern English dialect form. Folklore connection with deafness is via Psalm
lviii:1-5. The adder is said to stop up its ears to avoid hearing the snake charmer called in to
drive it away. Adderbolt (late 15c.) was a former name for dragonfly.


