virile (adj.)

late 15c., characteristic of a man; marked by manly force, from Middle French viril (14c.) and
directly from Latin virilis of a man, manly, worthy of a man, from vir a man, a hero, from PIE *wi-
ro- man, freeman (cognates: Sanskrit virah, Avestan vira-, Lithuanian vyras, Old Irish fer, Welsh
gwr, Gothic wair, Old English wer man). Virile member for penis is recorded from 1540s.


studly (adj.)

by 1971, American English, from stud (n.2) in the virile male sense + -ly (1). Related: Studliness.


macho

1928 (n.) tough guy, from Spanish macho male animal, noun use of adjective meaning masculine,
virile, from Latin masculus (see masculine). As an adjective, first attested in English 1959.


virility (n.)

period of manhood, 1580s, from Middle French virilit&#233;, from Latin virilitatem (nominative
virilitas) manhood, from virilis (see virile). Meaning power of procreation, capacity for sexua
intercourse is from 1590s; sense of manly strength is recorded from c.1600.


wergeld (n.)

set sum of money as the value of a free man, based on social rank, and paid as compensation for his
murder or injury in discharge of punishment or vengeance, Old English wergeld (Anglian, Kentish),
wergield (West Saxon), from wer man (see virile) + geld payment, tribute (see geld (n.)).


masculine (adj.)

mid-14c., belonging to the male grammatical gender; late 14c., of men, male, from Old French
masculin of the male sex (12c.), from Latin masculinus male, of masculine gender, from masculus
male, masculine; worthy of a man, diminutive of mas (genitive maris) male person, male, of unknown
origin. Meaning having the appropriate qualities of the male sex, manly, virile, powerful is first
attested 1620s. As a noun from mid-15c.


virago (n.)

late 14c., man-like or heroic woman, woman of extraordinary stature, strength and courage, from
Latin virago female warrior, heroine, amazon, from vir man (see virile). &AElig;lfric (c.1000),
following Vulgate, used it in Gen. ii:23 as the name Adam gave to Eve (KJV = woman):   Beo hire nama
Uirago, &thorn;&aelig;t is, f&aelig;mne, for&eth;an &eth;e heo is of hire were genumen.   Related:
Viraginous.


werewolf (n.)

late Old English werewulf person with the power to turn into a wolf, from wer man, male person (see
virile) + wulf (see wolf (n.); also see here for a short discussion of the mythology). Belief in
them was widespread in the Middle Ages. Similar formation in Middle Dutch weerwolf, Old High German
werwolf, Swedish varulf. In the ancient Persian calendar, the eighth month (October-November) was
Varkazana-, literally (Month of the) Wolf-Men.


triumvir (n.)

one of three men in the same office or of the same authority, mid-15c., from Latin triumvir, from
Old Latin phrase trium virum, genitive plural of tres viri three men, from tres three (see three) +
viri, plural of vir man (see virile). The Latin plural was triumviri.


arsenic (n.)

late 14c., from Old French arsenic, from Latin arsenicum, from late Greek arsenikon arsenic
(Dioscorides; Aristotle has it as sandarake), adapted from Syriac (al) zarniqa arsenic, from Middle
Persian zarnik gold-colored (arsenic trisulphide has a lemon-yellow color), from Old Iranian *zarna-
golden, from PIE root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold
(see glass).    The form of the Greek word is folk etymology, literally masculine, from arsen male,
strong, virile (compare arseno-koites lying with men in New Testament) supposedly in reference to
the powerful properties of the substance. The mineral (as opposed to the element) is properly
orpiment, from Latin auri pigmentum, so called because it was used to make golden dyes.


member (n.)

late 13c., sex organ (compare Latin membrum virile, but in English originally of women as well as
men), also, body part or organ (in plural, the body), from Old French membre part, portion; topic,
subject; limb, member of the body; member (of a group, etc.), 11c., from Latin membrum limb, member
of the body, part, probably from PIE *mems-ro, from root *mems- flesh, meat (cognates: Sanskrit
mamsam flesh; Greek meninx membrane, meros thigh (the fleshy part); Gothic mimz flesh). In English,
sense of person belonging to a group is first attested early 14c., from notion of constituent part
of a complex structure. Meaning one who has been elected to parliament is from early 15c.


virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


world (n.)

Old English woruld, worold human existence, the affairs of life, also a long period of time, also
the human race, mankind, humanity, a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon
werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt, German Welt),
with a literal sense of age of man, from Proto-Germanic *wer man (Old English wer, still in
werewolf; see virile) + *ald age (see old).    Originally life on earth, this world (as opposed to
the afterlife), sense extended to the known world, then to the physical world in the broadest sense,
the universe (c.1200). In Old English gospels, the commonest word for the physical world, was
Middangeard (Old Norse Midgard), literally the middle enclosure (see yard (n.1)), which is rooted in
Germanic cosmology. Greek kosmos in its ecclesiastical sense of world of people sometimes was
rendered in Gothic as manase&thorn;s, literally seed of man. The usual Old Norse word was heimr,
literally abode (see home). Words for world in some other Indo-European languages derive from the
root for bottom, foundation (such as Irish domun, Old Church Slavonic duno, related to English
deep); the Lithuanian word is pasaulis, from pa- under + saule sun.    Original sense in world
without end, translating Latin saecula saeculorum, and in worldly. Latin saeculum can mean both age
and world, as can Greek aion. Meaning a great quantity or number is from 1580s. Out of this world
surpassing, marvelous is from 1928; earlier it meant dead. World Cup is by 1951; U.S. baseball World
Series is by 1893 (originally often World's Series). World power in the geopolitical sense first
recorded 1900. World-class is attested from 1950, originally of Olympic athletes.


