virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


virtu (n.)

excellence in an object of art, passion for works of art, 1722, from Italian virtu excellence, from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) virtue, goodness, manliness (see virtue). The same word as
virtue, borrowed during a period when everything Italian was in vogue. Sometimes spelled vertu, as
though from French, but this sense of the word is not in French.


terrorism (n.)

1795, in specific sense of government intimidation during the Reign of Terror in France (March
1793-July 1794), from French terrorisme, from Latin terror (see terror).    If the basis of a
popular government in peacetime is virtue, its basis in a time of revolution is virtue and terror --
virtue, without which terror would be barbaric; and terror, without which virtue would be impotent.
[Robespierre, speech in French National Convention, 1794]    General sense of systematic use of
terror as a policy is first recorded in English 1798 (in reference to the Irish Rebellion of that
year). At one time, a word for a certain kind of mass-destruction terrorism was dynamitism (1883);
and during World War I frightfulness (translating German Schrecklichkeit) was used in Britain for
deliberate policy of terrorizing enemy non-combatants.


honesty (n.)

early 14c., splendor, honor; elegance, later honorable position; propriety of behavior, good
manners; virginity, chastity (late 14c.), from Old French honest&eacute; (Modern French
honn&ecirc;tet&eacute;), from Latin honestatem (nominative honestas) honor received from others;
reputation, character; figuratively uprightness, probity, integrity, virtue, from honestus (see
honest). Meaning moral purity, uprightness, virtue, justness is from c.1400; in English, the word
originally had more to do with honor than honest.


abstract (n.)

abridgement or summary of a document, mid-15c., from abstract (adj.). The general sense of a smaller
quantity containing the virtue or power of a greater [Johnson] is recorded from 1560s.


grace (n.)

late 12c., God's favor or help, from Old French grace pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks;
elegance, virtue (12c.), from Latin gratia favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will,
gratitude (source of Italian grazia, Spanish gracia), from gratus pleasing, agreeable, from PIE root
*gwere- (3) to favor (cognates: Sanskrit grnati sings, praises, announces, Lithuanian giriu to
praise, celebrate, Avestan gar- to praise).    Sense of virtue is early 14c., that of beauty of form
or movement, pleasing quality is mid-14c. In classical sense, one of the three sister goddesses
(Latin Grati&aelig;, Greek Kharites), bestowers of beauty and charm, it is first recorded in English
1579 in Spenser. The short prayer that is said before or after a meal (early 13c.; until 16c.
usually graces) has a sense of gratitude.


insider (n.)

one in possession of special information by virtue of being within some organization, 1848, from
inside + -er (1). Originally in reference to the stock markets.


commanding (adj.)

late 15c. (in astronomy), present participle adjective from command (v.). Meaning nobly dignified is
from 1590s. Meaning dominant by virtue of size or position is from 1630s. Related: Commandingly
(mid-15c.).


good (n.)

Old English g&#333;d that which is good, goodness; advantage, benefit; gift; virtue; property; from
good (adj.).


arete (n.2)

important concept in Greek philosophy, virtue, excellence, especially of manly qualities; literally
that which is good. The comparative form is areion, the superlative is aristos (compare
aristocracy).


extremism (n.)

1848, from extreme + -ism.    I would remind you that extremism in the defense of liberty is no
vice! And let me remind you also that moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue. [Barry
Goldwater (1909-1998), acceptance speech as Republican candidate for President, 1963]


levitate (v.)

1670s, to rise by virtue of lightness, from Latin levitas lightness, patterned in English on
gravitate. Sense of raise (a person) into the air is mainly from spiritualism (1870s). Related:
Levitated; levitating.


charitable (adj.)

c.1200, in reference to the Christian virtue, from Old French charitable, from charit&eacute; (see
charity). Meaning liberal in treatment of the poor is from c.1400; that of inclined to impute
favorable motives to others is from 1620s. Related: Charitableness; charitably.


goodness (n.)

Old English godnes goodness, virtue, kindliness; see good (adj.) + -ness. In exclamations from
1610s, first recorded being for goodnesse sake, i.e. as you trust in the goodness of God.


inefficacy (n.)

want of force or virtue to produce the desired effect, 1610s, from Late Latin inefficacia, from
inefficacem (nominative inefficax), from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + efficax (see
efficacy).


epicure (n.)

late 14c., follower of Epicurus, from Latin Epicurus, from Greek Epicouros (341-270 B.C.E.),
Athenian philosopher who taught that pleasure is the highest good and identified virtue as the
greatest pleasure; the first lesson recalled, the second forgotten, and the name used pejoratively
for one who gives himself up to sensual pleasure (1560s), especially glutton, sybarite (1774).
Epicurus' school opposed by stoics, who first gave his name a reproachful sense. Non-pejorative
meaning one who cultivates refined taste in food and drink is from 1580s.


works (n.)

Old English, (someone's) deeds, acts, or actions, the things one has done in life, often especially
good deeds, acts of piety, demonstrations of virtue, plural of work (n.). Meaning operations
pertinent to maintaining a large physical place (private, religious, or municipal) is from late 14c.
Meaning industrial place (usually with qualifying adjective) is from late 15c. To be in the works in
the extended sense of in the process of being done or made is by 1973.


exemplar (n.)

late 14c., original model of the universe in the mind of God, later (mid-15c.) model of virtue, from
Old French exemplaire (14c.) and directly from Late Latin exemplarium, from Latin exemplum (see
example).


unwieldy (adj.)

late 14c., lacking strength, powerless, from un- (1) not + obsolete wieldy, from Old English wielde
active, vigorous, from Proto-Germanic *walth- have power (see wield (v.)). Meaning moving
ungracefully is recorded from 1520s; in reference to weapons, difficult to handle, awkward by virtue
of size or shape it is attested from 1540s. Related: Unwieldiness.


virtual (adj.)

late 14c., influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent
natural qualities, from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus excellence, potency, efficacy,
literally manliness, manhood (see virtue). The meaning being something in essence or effect, though
not actually or in fact is from mid-15c., probably via sense of capable of producing a certain
effect (early 15c.). Computer sense of not physically existing but made to appear by software is
attested from 1959.


emerge (v.)

1560s, from Middle French &eacute;merger, from Latin emergere rise out or up, bring forth, bring to
light, from ex- out (see ex-) + mergere to dip, sink (see merge). The notion is of rising from a
liquid by virtue of buoyancy. Related: Emerged; emerging.


valiance (n.)

valiant character (obsolete or archaic), mid-15c., earlier vailance (late 14c.), from Anglo-French
vaillaunce, valiauns (c.1300) or Old French vaillance value, price; merit, worth; virtue, fine
qualities; courage, valor (12c.), from Old French valiant (see valiant).


simplistic (adj.)

simple, plain, not compound, 1844, from simple (adj.) + -istic. From 1867 as over-simple, trying to
explain too much by a single principle. Also (1860) of or pertaining to simples (herbs used in
healing, medicine of one ingredient only; the notion being that each herb possesses a particular
virtue, thus a simple remedy), from simplist one who studies simples (1590s; see simple (adj.)) +
-ic.


hedonist (n.)

1822, in reference to the Cyrenaic school of philosophy that deals with the ethics of pleasure, from
Greek hedonikos pleasurable, from hedone pleasure, related to hedys sweet, cognate with Latin suavis
(see sweet). A hedonist is properly the follower of any ethical system in which some sort of
pleasure ranks as the highest good. The Epicurian identifies this pleasure with the practice of
virtue.


self-interest (n.)

also self interest, 1640s, from self- + interest (n.). Related: Self-interested.    [Self-interest]
is a doctrine not very lofty, but clear and sure. It does not seek to attain great objects; but it
attains those it aims for without too much effort. ... [It] does not produce great devotion; but it
suggests little sacrifices each day; by itself it cannot make a man virtuous; but it forms a
multitude of citizens who are regulated, temperate, moderate, farsighted, masters of themselves; and
if it does not lead directly to virtue through the will, it brings them near to it insensibly
through habits. [Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America]


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


largesse (n.)

also largess, willingness to give or spend freely; munificence, c.1200, from Old French largesse a
bounty, munificence, from Vulgar Latin *largitia abundance, from Latin largus abundant (see large).
In medieval theology, the virtue whose opposite is avarice, and whose excess is prodigality [Middle
English Dictionary]. The Old French suffix -esse is from Latin -itia, added to adjectives to form
nouns of quality (compare duress, riches).


morality (n.)

late 14c., moral qualities, from Old French moralit&eacute; moral (of a story); moral instruction;
morals, moral character (13c.) and directly from Late Latin moralitatem (nominative moralitas)
manner, character, from Latin moralis (see moral (adj.)). Meaning goodness is attested from
1590s.Where there is no free agency, there can be no morality. Where there is no temptation, there
can be little claim to virtue.  Where the routine is rigorously proscribed by law, the law, and not
the man, must have the credit of the conduct. [William H. Prescott, History of the Conquest of Peru,
1847]


valor (n.)

c.1300, value, worth, from Old French valor, valour valor, moral worth, merit, courage, virtue
(12c.), from Late Latin valorem (nominative valor) value, worth (in Medieval Latin strength, valor),
from stem of Latin valere be strong, be worth (see valiant). The meaning courage is first recorded
1580s, from Italian valore, from the same Late Latin word. (The Middle English word also had a sense
of worth or worthiness in respect of manly qualities).


pupil (n.2)

center of the eye, early 15c. (in English in Latin form from late 14c.), from Old French pupille
(14c.), from Latin pupilla, originally little girl-doll, diminutive of pupa girl; doll (see pupil
(n.1)), so called from the tiny image one sees of himself reflected in the eye of another. Greek
used the same word, kore (literally girl), to mean both doll and pupil of the eye; and compare
obsolete baby small image of oneself in another's pupil (1590s), source of 17c. colloquial
expression to look babies stare lovingly into another's eyes.Self-knowledge can be obtained only by
looking into the mind and virtue of the soul, which is the diviner part of a man, as we see our own
image in another's eye. [Plato, Alcibiades, I.133]


doughty (adj.)

Old English dohtig competent, good, valiant, from dyhtig strong, related to dugan to be fit, be
able, be strong, and influenced by its past participle, dohte.    All from Proto-Germanic *duhtiz-
(cognates: Middle High German t&uuml;htec, German t&uuml;chtig, Middle Dutch duchtich), from PIE
*dheugh- to be fit, be of use, proper (cognates: German Tugend virtue, Greek teukhein to make ready,
Irish dual becoming, fit, Russian du&#382;ij strong, robust). Rare after 17c.; in deliberately
archaic or mock-heroic use since c.1800. If it had survived, its modern form would be dighty.


apron (n.)

mid-15c., faulty separation (as also in adder, umpire) of a napron (c.1300), from Old French naperon
small table-cloth, diminutive of nappe cloth, from Latin mappa napkin. Napron was still in use as
recently as late 16c. The shift of Latin -m- to -n- was a tendency in Old French (conter from
computare, printemps from primum, natte mat, matting, from matta). Symbolic of wife's business from
1610s. Apron-string tenure was in reference to property held in virtue of one's wife, or during her
lifetime only.Even at his age, he ought not to be always tied to his mother's apron string. [Anne
Bront&#235;, The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, 1848]


light (adj.1)

not heavy, from Old English leoht not heavy, light in weight; easy, trifling; quick, agile, from
Proto-Germanic *lingkhtaz (cognates: Old Norse lettr, Swedish l&auml;tt, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
licht, German leicht, Gothic leihts), from PIE root *legwh- not heavy, having little weight
(cognates: Latin levis light, Old Irish lu small; see lever).    The notion in make light of (1520s)
is of unimportance. Alternative spelling lite, the darling of advertisers, is first recorded 1962.
The adverb is Old English leohte, from the adjective. Light-skirts woman of easy virtue is attested
from 1590s. To make light of is from 1520s.


hypocrisy (n.)

c.1200, ipocrisie, from Old French ypocrisie, from Late Latin hypocrisis, from Greek hypokrisis
acting on the stage, pretense, from hypokrinesthai play a part, pretend, also answer, from hypo-
under (see sub-) + middle voice of krinein to sift, decide (see crisis). The sense evolution in
Attic Greek is from separate gradually to answer to answer a fellow actor on stage to play a part.
The h- was restored in English 16c.    Hypocrisy is the art of affecting qualities for the purpose
of pretending to an undeserved virtue. Because individuals and institutions and societies most often
live down to the suspicions about them, hypocrisy and its accompanying equivocations underpin the
conduct of life. Imagine how frightful truth unvarnished would be. [Benjamin F. Martin, France in
1938, 2005]


craft (n.)

Old English cr&aelig;ft (West Saxon, Northumbrian), -creft (Kentish), originally power, physical
strength, might, from Proto-Germanic *krab-/*kraf- (cognates: Old Frisian kreft, Old High German
chraft, German Kraft strength, skill; Old Norse kraptr strength, virtue). Sense expanded in Old
English to include skill, dexterity; art, science, talent (via a notion of mental power), which led
by late Old English to the meaning trade, handicraft, calling, also something built or made. The
word still was used for might, power in Middle English.    Use for small boat is first recorded
1670s, probably from a phrase similar to vessels of small craft and referring either to the trade
they did or the seamanship they required, or perhaps it preserves the word in its original sense of
power.


demi-monde (n.)

1855, also demimonde, from French demi-monde so-so society, literally half-world, from demi- half +
monde, from Latin mundus world (see mundane).    Popularized by use as title of a comedy by
Alexandre Dumas fils (1824-1895). Dumas' Demi-Monde is the link between good and bad society ... the
world of compromised women, a social limbo, the inmates of which ... are perpetually struggling to
emerge into the paradise of honest and respectable ladies [Fraser's Magazine, 1855]. Not properly
used of courtesans. Compare 18th-century English demi-rep (1749, the second element short for
reputation), defined as a woman that intrigues with every man she likes, under the name and
appearance of virtue ... in short, whom every body knows to be what no body calls her [Fielding].


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


claim (v.)

c.1300, to call, call out; to ask or demand by virtue of right or authority, from accented stem of
Old French clamer to call, name, describe; claim; complain; declare, from Latin clamare to cry out,
shout, proclaim, from PIE *kele- (2) to shout, imitative (compare Sanskrit usakala cock, literally
dawn-calling; Latin calare to announce solemnly, call out; Middle Irish cailech cock; Greek kalein
to call, kelados noise, kledon report, fame; Old High German halan to call; Old English hlowan to
low, make a noise like a cow; Lithuanian kalba language). Related: Claimed; claiming.    Meaning to
maintain as true is from 1864; specific sense to make a claim (on an insurance company) is from
1897. Claim properly should not stray too far from its true meaning of to demand recognition of a
right.


rune (n.)

Old English run, rune secret, mystery, dark mysterious statement, (secret) council, also a runic
letter (runst&#230;f), from Proto-Germanic *runo (cognates: Old Norse run a secret, magic sign,
runic character, Old High German runa a secret conversation, whisper, Gothic runa), from PIE *ru-
no-, source of technical terms of magic in Germanic and Celtic (cognates: Gaelic run a secret,
mystery, craft, deceit, purpose, intention, desire, Welsh rhin a secret, charm, virtue). Also see
Runnymede.    The word entered Middle English as roun and by normal evolution would have become
Modern English *rown, but it died out mid-15c. when the use of runes did. The modern usage is from
late 17c., from German philologists who had reintroduced the word in their writings from a
Scandinavian source (such as Danish rune, from Old Norse run). The runic alphabet is believed to
have developed by 2c. C.E. from contact with Greek writing, with the letters modified to be more
easily cut into wood or stone.


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


bigot (n.)

1590s, sanctimonious person, religious hypocrite, from French bigot (12c.), of unknown origin.
Earliest French use of the word is as the name of a people apparently in southern Gaul, which led to
the now-doubtful, on phonetic grounds, theory that the word comes from Visigothus. The typical use
in Old French seems to have been as a derogatory nickname for Normans, the old theory (not
universally accepted) being that it springs from their frequent use of the Germanic oath bi God. But
OED dismisses in a three-exclamation-mark fury one fanciful version of the by god theory as absurdly
incongruous with facts. At the end, not much is left standing except Spanish bigote mustache, which
also has been proposed but not explained, and the chief virtue of which as a source seems to be
there is no evidence for or against it.    In support of the by God theory, as a surname Bigott,
Bygott are attested in Normandy and in England from the 11c., and French name etymology sources
(such as Dauzat) explain it as a derogatory name applied by the French to the Normans and
representing by god. The English were known as goddamns 200 years later in Joan of Arc's France, and
during World War I Americans serving in France were said to be known as les sommobiches (see also
son of a bitch). But the sense development in bigot is difficult to explain. According to Donkin,
the modern use first appears in French 16c. This and the earliest English sense, religious
hypocrite, especially a female one, might have been influenced by beguine and the words that cluster
around it. Sense extended 1680s to other than religious opinions.


stage (n.)

mid-13c., story of a building; early 14c., raised platform used for public display (also the
platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage building, dwelling place; stage for
performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey (12c., Modern French &#233;tage story of a house,
stage, floor, loft), from Vulgar Latin *staticum a place for standing, from Latin statum, past
participle of stare to stand (see stet). Meaning platform for presentation of a play is attested
from late 14c.; generalized for profession of an actor from 1580s.    Sense of period of development
or time in life first recorded early 14c., probably from Middle English sense of degree or step on
the 'ladder' of virtue, 'wheel' of fortune, etc., in parable illustrations and morality plays.
Meaning a step in sequence, a stage of a journey is late 14c. Meaning level of water in a river,
etc. is from 1814, American English.   Stage-name is from 1727. Stage-mother (n.) in the overbearing
mother-of-an-actress sense is from 1915. Stage-door is from 1761, hence Stage-Door Johnny young man
who frequents stage doors seeking the company of actresses, chorus girls, etc. (1907). Stage
whisper, such as used by an actor on stage to be heard by the audience, first attested 1865. Stage-
manage (v.) is from 1871.


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


