virus (n.)

late 14c., venomous substance, from Latin virus poison, sap of plants, slimy liquid, a potent juice,
probably from PIE root *weis- to melt away, to flow, used of foul or malodorous fluids, with
specialization in some languages to poisonous fluid (cognates: Sanskrit visam poison, visah
poisonous; Avestan vish- poison; Latin viscum sticky substance, birdlime; Greek ios poison, ixos
mistletoe, birdlime; Old Church Slavonic vi&#353;nja cherry; Old Irish fi poison; Welsh gwy fluid,
water, gwyar blood). Main modern meaning agent that causes infectious disease first recorded 1728
(in reference to venereal disease). The computer sense is from 1972.


viral (adj.)

of the nature of, or caused by, a virus, 1948, see virus + -al. Sense of become suddenly widely
popular through Internet sharing is attested by 1999, originally in reference to marketing and based
on the similarity of the effect to the spread of a computer virus. Related: Virally.


rotavirus (n.)

wheel-shaped virus causing inflammation of the lining of the intestines, 1974, from Latin rota wheel
(see rotary) + virus.


virulent (adj.)

c.1400, in reference to wounds, ulcers, etc., full of corrupt or poisonous matter, from Latin
virulentus poisonous, from virus poison (see virus). Figurative sense of violent, spiteful is
attested from c.1600. Related: Virulently.


virion (n.)

coined in French, 1959, from virus (see virus) + -on.


HIV (n.)

1986, initialism (acronym) from human immunodeficiency virus, name for either of the two viruses
that cause AIDS.


phage (n.)

virus that destroys bacteria, 1917, an abbreviated form of bacteriophage.


ebola (n.)

virus, 1976, named for Ebola River valley in Congo, where it first was studied.


reovirus (n.)

1959, coined by U.S. medical researcher Dr. Albert B. Sabin (1906-1993), acronym for respiratory
enteric orphan virus; orphan because it was not connected to any of the diseases it is associated
with.


echovirus (n.)

also ECHO virus, 1955, acronym for enteric cytopathogenic human orphan; orphan because when
discovered they were not known to cause any disease.


virology (n.)

1935, from comb. form of virus + -ology. Related: Virological.


enterovirus (n.)

1957; see entero- + virus.


antivirus (n.)

1903, from anti- + virus.


rhinovirus (n.)

1961, from rhino- + virus.


parvovirus (n.)

1965, from parvi- + connecting element -o- + virus.


Epstein-Barr virus

1968, named for British virologist Michael Anthony Epstein and Irish-born virologist Yvonne M. Barr.


retrovirus (n.)

1977, earlier retravirus (1974), from re(verse) tra(nscriptase) + virus. So called because it
contains reverse transcriptase, an enzyme that uses RNA instead of DNA to encode genetic
information, which reverses the usual pattern. Remodeled by influence of retro- backwards.


viscous (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French viscous and directly from Late Latin viscosus sticky, from Latin viscum
anything sticky, birdlime made from mistletoe, mistletoe, probably from PIE root *weis- to melt
away, flow (used of foul or malodorous fluids); see virus.


vaccination (n.)

1800, used by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) for the technique he devised of preventing
smallpox by injecting people with the cowpox virus (variolae vaccinae), from vaccine (adj.)
pertaining to cows, from cows (1798), from Latin vaccinus from cows, from vacca cow (Latin bos cow
being originally ox, a loan word from a rural dialect according to Buck, who cites Umbrian bue). The
use of the term for diseases other than smallpox is due to Pasteur [OED].


Trojan (adj.)

Old English Troian of or pertaining to ancient Troy, from Latin Trojanus, from Troia, Troja Troy,
from the Greek name for the city, said to be from Tros, name of a king of Phrygia, the mythical
founder of Troy. Trojan horse was figurative of ambush-from-within in Roman times (equus Troianus);
attested in English from 1570s; the computer virus sense is attested by 1982.    As a noun from mid-
14c., inhabitant of ancient Troy; in early modern English, the noun could mean a determined fellow,
one who fights or works hard, from the Trojans' long resistance to the Greeks in the Trojan War, but
also in 17c., it was a colloquial term for person of dissolute life, carousing companion. The trade
name for a brand of prophylactic contraceptive was registered 1927 in U.S.


poison (n.)

c.1200, a deadly potion or substance, also figuratively, from Old French poison, puison (12c.,
Modern French poison) a drink, especially a medical drink, later a (magic) potion, poisonous drink
(14c.), from Latin potionem (nominative potio) a drinking, a drink, also poisonous drink (Cicero),
from potare to drink (see potion).    For form evolution from Latin to French, compare raison from
rationem. The Latin word also is the source of Old Spanish pozon, Italian pozione, Spanish pocion.
The more usual Indo-European word for this is represented in English by virus. The Old English word
was ator (see attercop) or lybb. Slang sense of alcoholic drink first attested 1805, American
English.    For sense evolution, compare Old French enerber, enherber to kill with poisonous plants.
In many Germanic languages poison is named by a word equivalent to English gift (such as Old High
German gift, German Gift, Danish and Swedish gift; Dutch gift, vergift). This shift might have been
partly euphemistic, partly by influence of Greek dosis a portion prescribed, literally a giving,
used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medicine (see dose (n.)).
Figuratively from late 15c.; of persons by 1910. As an adjective from 1520s; with plant names from
18c. Poison ivy first recorded 1784; poison oak is from 1743. Poison gas first recorded 1915.
Poison-pen (letter) popularized 1913 by a notorious criminal case in Pennsylvania, U.S.; the phrase
dates to 1898.


