viscera (n.)

inner organs of the body, 1650s, from Latin viscera, plural of viscus internal organ, of unknown
origin.


visceral (adj.)

1570s, affecting inward feelings, from Middle French visc&eacute;ral and directly from Medieval
Latin visceralis internal, from Latin viscera, plural of viscus internal organ, inner parts of the
body, of unknown origin. The bowels were regarded as the seat of emotion. The figurative sense
vanished after 1640 and the literal sense is first recorded in 1794. The figurative sense was
revived 1940s in arts criticism.


eviscerate (v.)

c. 1600 (figurative); 1620s (literal), from Latin evisceratus, past participle of eviscerare to
disembowel, from assimilated form of ex- out (see ex-) + viscera internal organs (see viscera).
Sometimes used 17c. in a figurative sense of to bring out the deepest secrets of. Related:
Eviscerated; eviscerating.


pluck (n.)

c. 1400, act of plucking, from pluck (v.). Meaning courage, boldness (1785), originally in pugilism
slang, is a figurative use from earlier meaning heart, viscera (1610s) as that which is plucked from
slaughtered livestock. Perhaps influenced by figurative use of the verb in pluck up (one's courage,
etc.), attested from c. 1300.


splanchnic (adj.)

1690s, pertaining to the viscera, from medical Latin splanchnicus, from Greek splankhnon (see
splanchno-) + -ic.


splanchno-

before vowels splanchn-, word-forming element meaning viscera, from  Greek splankhnon, usually in
plural, splankhna the innards, entrails (including heart, lungs, liver, kidneys); related to splen
(see spleen).


abdomen (n.)

1540s, belly fat, from Latin abdomen belly, which is of unknown origin, perhaps from abdere conceal,
with a sense of concealment of the viscera, or else what is concealed by proper dress. De Vaan,
however, finds this derivation unfounded. Purely anatomical sense is from 1610s. Zoological sense of
posterior division of the bodies of arthropods first recorded 1788.


hypochondria (n.)

1839, illness without a specific cause, earlier (1660s) depression or melancholy without real cause,
earlier still (late 14c.) ipocondrie upper abdomen, from Late Latin hypochondria the abdomen, from
Greek hypokhondria (neuter plural of hypokhondrios), from hypo- under (see sub-) + khondros
cartilage (of the breastbone); see grind (v.). Reflecting ancient belief that the viscera of the
hypochondria were the seat of melancholy and the source of the vapors that caused such feelings.


quarry (n.1)

what is hunted, early 14c., quirre entrails of deer placed on the hide and given to dogs of the
chase as a reward, from Anglo-French quirreie, Old French cuiriee the spoil, quarry (Modern French
cur&#233;e), altered (by influence of Old French cuir skin, from Latin corium hide), from Old French
cor&eacute;e viscera, entrails, from Vulgar Latin *corata entrails, from Latin cor heart, from PIE
root *kerd- (1) heart (see heart (n.)). Sense of anything chased in hunt is first recorded 1610s;
earlier bird targeted by a hawk or other raptor (late 15c.).


