viscous (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French viscous and directly from Late Latin viscosus sticky, from Latin viscum
anything sticky, birdlime made from mistletoe, mistletoe, probably from PIE root *weis- to melt
away, flow (used of foul or malodorous fluids); see virus.


glop (n.)

1943, imitative of the sound of something viscous and unappetizing hitting a dinner plate.


gunk (n.)

1949, viscous substance, American English, apparently from Gunk, trademark for a thick liquid soap
patented 1932 by A.F. Curran Co. of Malden, Mass.


birdlime (n.)

viscous sticky stuff prepared from holly bark and used to catch small birds, mid-15c., from bird
(n.1) + lime (n.1). Used as rhyming slang for time (especially time in prison) by 1857.


viscosity (n.)

early 15c., from Old French viscosite (13c.) or directly from Medieval Latin viscositatem
(nominative viscositas), from Late Latin viscosus (see viscous).


mucilaginous (adj.)

early 15c., viscous, sticky, from Medieval Latin muscilaginosus, from Late Latin mucilaginosus, from
mucillago (see mucilage). Related: Mucilaginously.


glutinous (adj.)

of the nature of glue, early 15c. (implied c.1400 in glutinosity), from Latin glutinosus gluey,
viscous, tenacious, from gluten (genitive glutinis) glue (see glue (n.)).


relent (v.)

late 14c., to melt, soften, dissolve, from re- + Latin lentus slow, viscous, supple (see lithe),
perhaps on model of Old French rallentir. Sense of become less harsh or cruel first recorded 1520s.
The notion probably is of a hard heart melting with pity. Related: Relented; relenting.


viscid (adj.)

sticky, 1630s, from French viscide or directly from Late Latin viscidus sticky, clammy, from Latin
viscum mistletoe, birdlime (see viscous). Related: Viscidity (1610s); viscidly.


gout (n.)

c.1200, from Old French gote (10c., Modern French goutte) gout; drop, from Latin gutta a drop, in
Medieval Latin gout, of unknown origin. The disease was thought to be caused by drops of viscous
humors seeping from the blood into the joints, which turned out to be close to the modern scientific
view.


mucilage (n.)

late 14c., mussillage, viscous substance found in vegetable material, from Old French mucilage
(14c.), from Late Latin mucilago musty or moldy juice (4c.), from Latin mucere be musty or moldy,
from mucus mucus  (see mucus). Meaning adhesive is first attested 1859.


clammy (adj.)

soft and sticky, late 14c., probably from Middle English clam viscous, sticky, muddy (mid-14c.),
from Old English cl&aelig;m mud, sticky clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaimaz clay (cognates: Flemish
klammig, Low German klamig sticky, damp, Old English cl&aelig;man to smear, plaster; cognates:
clay). With -y (2). Related: Clammily; clamminess.


tar (n.1)

a viscous liquid, Old English teoru, teru tar, bitumen, resin, gum, literally the pitch of (certain
kinds of) trees, from Proto-Germanic *terwo- (cognates: Old Norse tjara, Old Frisian tera, Middle
Dutch tar, Dutch teer, German Teer), probably a derivation of *trewo-, from PIE *derw-, variant of
root *deru-, *dreu- in its sense wood, tree (see tree (n.)).   Tar baby a sticky problem, also a
derogatory term for black person, is from an 1881 Uncle Remus story by Joel Chandler Harris. Tarheel
for North Carolina resident first recorded 1864, probably from the gummy resin of pine woods. Tar
water, an infusion of tar in cold water, was popular as a remedy from c.1740 through late 18c.


thick (adj.)

Old English &thorn;icce dense, viscous, solid, stiff; numerous, abundant; deep, also as an adverb,
thickly, closely, often, frequently, from Proto-Germanic *thiku- (cognates: Old Saxon thikki, Old
High German dicchi, German dick, Old Norse &thorn;ykkr, Old Frisian thikke), from PIE *tegu- thick
(cognates: Gaelic tiugh). Secondary Old English sense of close together is preserved in thickset and
proverbial phrase thick as thieves (1833). Meaning stupid is first recorded 1590s. Related: Thickly.
As a noun, the thick part (of anything), from mid-13c. Phrase through thick and thin, indicating
rough or smooth going, hence unwaveringly, is in Chaucer (late 14c.); thick-skinned is attested from
1540s; in figurative sense from c.1600. To be in the thick of some action, etc., to be at the most
intense moment is from 1680s, from a Middle English noun sense.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


