visionary (adj.)

able to see visions, 1650s (earlier perceived in a vision, 1640s), from vision + -ary. Meaning
impractical is attested from 1727. The noun is attested from 1702, from the adjective; originally
one who indulges in impractical fantasies.


vision (n.)

c.1300, something seen in the imagination or in the supernatural, from Anglo-French visioun, Old
French vision presence, sight; view, look, appearance; dream, supernatural sight (12c.), from Latin
visionem (nominative visio) act of seeing, sight, thing seen, noun of action from past participle
stem of videre to see.    This is from the productive PIE root *weid- to know, to see (cognates:
Sanskrit veda I know; Avestan vaeda I know; Greek oida, Doric woida I know, idein to see; Old Irish
fis vision, find white, i.e. clearly seen, fiuss knowledge; Welsh gwyn, Gaulish vindos, Breton gwenn
white; Gothic, Old Swedish, Old English witan to know; Gothic weitan to see; English wise, German
wissen to know; Lithuanian vysti to see; Bulgarian vidya I see; Polish widzie&#263; to see,
wiedzie&#263; to know; Russian videt' to see, vest' news, Old Russian vedat' to know).    The
meaning sense of sight is first recorded late 15c. Meaning statesman-like foresight, political
sagacity is attested from 1926.


invision (n.)

want of vision, 1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + vision.


envision (v.)

1914, from en- (1) make, put in + vision. Related: Envisioned; envisioning. Earlier (1827) is
envision'd in sense endowed with vision.


view (n.)

early 15c., formal inspection or survey (of land); mid-15c., visual perception, from Anglo-French
vewe view, Old French veue light, brightness; look, appearance; eyesight, vision, noun use of fem.
past participle of veoir to see, from Latin videre to see (see vision). Sense of manner of regarding
something attested from early 15c. Meaning sight or prospect of a landscape, etc. is recorded from
c.1600.


prevision (n.)

1610s, foresight, from French pr&eacute;vision (14c.), from Late Latin praevisionem (nominative
praevisio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin praevidere see first, see beforehand,
from prae- before (see pre-) + videre to see (see vision).


visage (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French and Old French visage face, coutenance; portrait, from vis face,
appearance, from Latin visus a look, vision, from past participle stem of videre to see (see
vision). Visagiste make-up artist is recorded from 1958, from French.


visual (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the faculty of sight; also coming from the eye or sight (as a beam of
light was thought to do), from Late Latin visualis of sight, from Latin visus a sight, a looking;
power of sight; things seen, appearance, from visus, past participle of videre to see (see vision).
Meaning perceptible by sight is from late 15c; sense of relating to vision is first attested c.1600.
The noun meaning photographic film or other visual display is first recorded 1944.


blind spot (n.)

1864, spot within one's range of vision where yet one cannot see. Of flaws in the eye, from 1872;
figurative sense in use by 1907.


vue

French, literally view, sight; aspect, appearance; vision (see view (n.)).


blinkered (adj.)

in the figurative sense, 1867, from horses wearing blinkers to limit the range of their vision (see
blinker).


vide

see, Latin imperative singular of videre to see (see vision).


television (n.)

1907, as a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires; formed in
English or borrowed from French t&eacute;l&eacute;vision, from tele- + vision.    Television is not
impossible in theory. In practice it would be very costly without being capable of serious
application. But we do not want that. On that day when it will be possible to accelerate our methods
of telephotography by at least ten times, which does not appear to be impossible in the future, we
shall arrive at television with a hundred telegraph wires. Then the problem of sight at a distance
will without doubt cease to be a chimera. [Telegraphing Pictures in Windsor Magazine, 1907]    Other
proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were
telephote (1880) and televista (1904). The technology was developed in the 1920s and '30s. Nativized
in German as Fernsehen. Shortened form TV is from 1948. Meaning a television set is from 1941.
Meaning television as a medium is from 1927.  Television is the first truly democratic culture --
the first culture available to everyone and entirely governed by what the people want. The most
terrifying thing is what people do want. [Clive Barnes, New York Times, Dec. 30, 1969]


Panavision (n.)

1955, proprietary name of a type of wide-screen lens, word formed from elements of panorama +
vision.


Vistavision (n.)

form of wide-screen cinematography, 1954; see vista + vision.


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


clearly (adv.)

c.1300, of vision and speech, from clear (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning evidently is from 1560s; as a
parenthetical expression in argument, it is clear, recorded from 1867.


blear (adj.)

c.1300, blere watery, rheumy, perhaps related to blur. Compare Middle High German blerre having
blurred vision.


vid.

abbreviation of vide, Latin imperative singular of videre to see (see vision).


conspectus (n.)

1836, from Latin conspectus a looking at, sight, view; range or power of vision, from past
participle of conspicere to look at (see conspicuous).


televangelist (n.)

1973, from tele(vision) + evangelist. Earliest usages are in reference to Rex Humbard (television
evangelist is from 1958).


insight (n.)

c.1200, innsihht, sight with the eyes of the mind, mental vision, understanding, from in + sight.
Sense shaded into penetrating understanding into character or hidden nature (1580s).


specter (n.)

c.1600, frightening ghost, from French spectre an image, figure, ghost (16c.), from Latin spectrum
appearance, vision, apparition (see spectrum). Figurative sense object of dread is from 1774.


stereoscope (n.)

1838, coined by inventor Sir Charles Whetstone (1802-1875) from stereo- + -scope. Instrument
allowing binocular vision of two identical pictures that appear as a single image with relief and
solidity. Related: Stereoscopy; stereoscopically.


blear (v.)

to dim (of vision); to have watery or rheumy eyes, early 14c., of uncertain origin, possibly from an
Old English *blerian, from the same source as blear (adj.). Related: Bleared; blearing.


vedette (n.)

mounted sentinel placed in advance of an outpost, 1680s, from French vedette (16c.), from Italian
(Florentine) vedetta watch tower, peep hole, probably from vedere to see, from Latin videre to see
(see vision).


visibility (n.)

c.1400, condition of being visible, from Late Latin visibilitatem (nominative visibilitas) condition
of being seen; conspicuousness, from visibilis (see visible). Meaning range of vision under given
conditions is from 1914. Sense of prominence, fame, public attention is recorded from 1958.


optometry (n.)

1886, from optometer (1738), an instrument for testing vision, from opto- sight, from Greek optos
seen, visible (see optic) + -metry. Probably influenced by French optom&eacute;trie.


vista (n.)

1650s, a view or prospect, from Italian vista sight, view, noun use of fem. past participle of
vedere see, from Latin videre to see (see vision).


revision (n.)

1610s, act of revising, from French r&#233;vision, from Late Latin revisionem (nominative revisio) a
seeing again, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin revidere (see revise). Meaning a
product of revision is from 1845.


Gwendolyn

fem. proper name; the first element is Breton gwenn white (cognates: Welsh gwyn, Old Irish find,
Gaelic fionn, Gaulish vindo- white, shining, literally visible), from nasalized form of PIE root
*weid- to see, know (see vision).


voila (interj.)

1739, French voil&#224;, imperative of voir to see, to view (from Latin videre to see; see vision) +
la there (from Latin ille yonder).


visible (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French visable, visible perceptible (12c.) and directly from Latin visibilis that
may be seen, from visus, past participle of videre to see (see vision). An Old English word for this
was eagsyne. Related: Visibly.


clairvoyant (adj.)

having psychic gifts, 1837, earlier having insight (1670s), from special use of French clairvoyant
clear-sighted, discerning, judicious (13c.), from clair (see clear (adj.)) + voyant seeing, present
participle of voir, from Latin videre to see (see vision).


revise (v.)

1560s, to look at again, from Middle French reviser (13c.), from Latin revisere look at again, visit
again, look back on, frequentative of revidere (past participle revisus), from re- again (see re-) +
videre to see (see vision). Meaning to look over again with intent to improve or amend is recorded
from 1590s. Related: Revised; revising.


specular (adj.)

1570s, reflective (like a mirror), from Latin specularis, from speculum a mirror (see speculum).
Meaning assisting in vision; affording a view is from 1650s, from Latin speculari to spy (see
speculation).


provide (v.)

early 15c., from Latin providere look ahead, prepare, supply, act with foresight, from pro- ahead
(see pro-) + videre to see (see vision). Related: Provided; providing. Earlier in same sense was
purvey, which is the same word as deformed in Old French.


review (n.)

mid-15c., an inspection of military forces, from Middle French reveue a reviewing, review, noun use
of fem. past participle of reveeir to see again, go to see again, from Latin revidere, from re-
again (see re-) + videre to see (see vision). Sense of process of going over again is from 1560s;
that of a view of the past, a retrospective survey is from c.1600. Meaning general examination or
criticism of a recent work is first attested 1640s.


voyeur (n.)

a scopophiliac, 1889 as a French word in English, from French voyeur, literally one who views or
inspects, from voir to view, from Latin videre to see (see vision).   Je ne puis pourtant omettre
une cat&#233;gorie de sadistes assez &#233;tonnants; ce sont ceux qu'on d&#233;signe sous le nom de
voyeurs. Ceux-ci cherchent une excitation dans les spectacles impudiques. [L&#233;o Taxil]


Rig veda

1776, from Sanskrit rigveda, from rg- praise, hymn, spoken stanza, literally brightness, from PIE
*erkw- to radiate, beam; praise + veda knowledge, from PIE *weid-o-, from root *weid- to know, see
(see vision (n.)). A thousand hymns, orally transmitted, probably dating from before 1000 B.C.E.
Related: Rig-vedic.


-oid

word-forming element meaning like, like that of, thing like a ______, from Latinized form of Greek
-oeides, from eidos form, related to idein to see, eidenai to know; literally to see, from PIE
*weid-es-, from root *weid- to see, to know (see vision). The -o- is connective or a stem vowel from
the previous element.


evident (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French evident and directly from Latin evidentem (nominative evidens)
perceptible, clear, obvious, apparent from ex- fully, out of (see ex-) + videntem (nominative
videns), present participle of videre to see (see vision).


supervise (v.)

late 15c., to look over (implied in supervising), from Medieval Latin supervisus, past participle of
supervidere oversee, inspect, from Latin super over (see super-) + videre see (see vision). Meaning
to oversee and superintend the work or performance of others is attested from 1640s. Related:
Supervised.


video (adj.)

1935, as visual equivalent of audio, from Latin video I see, first person singular present
indicative of videre to see (see vision). As a noun, that which is displayed on a (television)
screen, 1937.    Engineers, however, remember the sad fate of television's first debut and are not
willing to allow video transmission (as television is now called by moderns) to leave the laboratory
until they are sure it will be accepted. [The Michigan Technic, November 1937]   video game is from
1973.


visa (n.)

1831, official signature or endorsement on a passport, from French visa, from Modern Latin charta
visa verified paper, literally paper that has been seen, from fem. past participle of Latin videre
to see (see vision). Earlier vis&eacute; (1810), from French past participle of viser to examine,
view. The credit card of this name was introduced 1976, replacing BankAmericard.


rapt (adj.)

late 14c., carried away in an ecstatic trance, from Latin raptus, past participle of rapere seize,
carry off (see rape (v.)). A figurative sense, the notion is of carried up into Heaven (bodily or in
a dream), as in a saint's vision. Latin literal sense of carried away was in English from 1550s. In
15c.-17c. the word also sometimes could mean raped. Sense of engrossed first recorded c.1500. As a
past participle adjective, in English it spawned the back-formed verb rap to affect with rapture,
which was common c.1600-1750.


visit (v.)

c.1200, come to (a person) to comfort or benefit, from Old French visiter to visit; inspect,
examine; afflict (12c.) and directly from Latin visitare to go to see, come to inspect,
frequentative of visere behold, visit (a person or place), from past participle stem of videre to
see, notice, observe (see vision). Originally of the deity, later of pastors and doctors (c.1300),
general sense of pay a call is from mid-13c. Meaning come upon, afflict (in reference to sickness,
punishment, etc.) is recorded in English from mid-14c. Related: Visited; visiting.


viz.

1530s, abbreviation of videlicet that is to say, to wit, namely (mid-15c.), from Latin videlicet,
contraction of videre licet it is permissible to see, from videre to see (see vision) + licet it is
allowed, third person singular present indicative of licere be allowed (see licence). The -z- is not
a letter, but originally a twirl, representing the usual Medieval Latin shorthand symbol for the
ending -et. In reading aloud usually rendered by 'namely.'  [OED]


Veda (n.)

ancient sacred Hindu book, 1734, from Sanskrit veda, literally knowledge, understanding, especially
sacred knowledge, from root vid- to know, from PIE root *weid- to see (related to wit, and to
Avestan vaeda I know, Latin videre to see; see vision (n.)). The books are the Rig-, Yajur-, Sama-,
and Atharva-veda.


envy (n.)

late 13c., from Old French envie envy, jealousy, rivalry (10c.), from Latin invidia envy, jealousy,
from invidus envious, from invidere envy, earlier look at (with malice), cast an evil eye upon, from
in- upon (see in- (2)) + videre to see (see vision).    Similar formations in Avestan nipashnaka
envious, also look at; Old Church Slavonic zavideti to envy, from videti to see; Lithuanian pavydeti
to envy, related to veizdeti to see, to look at.


