vital statistics (n.)

1837, with reference to birth, marriage, death, etc.; meaning a woman's bust, waist, and hip
measurements is from 1952. See vital.


vitals (n.)

organs of the body essential to life, c.1600, from noun use of adjective vital, perhaps on model of
Latin vitalia vital force, neuter plural of vitalis.


vitality (n.)

1590s, from Latin vitalitatem (nominative vitalitas) vital force, life, from vitalis pertaining to
life (see vital).


vital (adj.)

late 14c., of or manifesting life, from Latin vitalis of or belonging to life, from vita life,
related to vivere to live, from PIE root *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). The sense of necessary or
important is from 1610s, via the notion of essential to life (late 15c.). Vital capacity recorded
from 1852. Related: Vitally.


vitalize (v.)

1670s, to give life to, from vital + -ize. Figurative sense by 1805. Related: Vitalized; vitalizing.


vivacity (n.)

early 15c., liveliness, vigor, from Old French vivacite or directly from Latin vivacitatem
(nominative vivacitas) vital force, liveliness, from vivax (genitive vivacis) lively, also long-
lived, from vivere to live (see vital).


eon (n.)

1640s, from Latin aeon, from Greek aion age, vital force, a period of existence, lifetime,
generation; in plural, eternity, from PIE root *aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity
(cognates: Sanskrit ayu life, Avestan ayu age, Latin aevum space of time, eternity, Gothic aiws age,
eternity, Old Norse &aelig;vi lifetime, German ewig everlasting, Old English a ever, always).


vita (n.)

plural vitae, Latin, literally life (see vital).


daylight (n.)

c.1300 (as two words from mid-12c., daies liht), from day + light (n.); its figurative sense of
clearly visible open space between two things (1820) has been used in references to boats in a race,
U.S. football running backs avoiding opposing tackles, a rider and a saddle, and the rim of a glass
and the surface of the liquor. The (living) daylights that you beat out of someone were originally
slang for the eyes (1752), extended figuratively to the vital senses.


aye (adv.)

always, ever, c.1200, from Old Norse ei ever (cognate with Old English a always, ever), from PIE
*aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity (cognates: Greek aion age, eternity, Latin aevum space
of time; see eon).


revive (v.)

early 15c., return to consciousness; restore to health, from Middle French revivre (10c.), from
Latin revivere to live again, from re- again (see re-) + vivere to live (see vital). Meaning bring
back to notice or fashion is from mid-15c. Related: Revived; reviving.


Evan

masc. proper name, Welsh form of John, form influenced perhaps by Welsh ieuanc young man (cognate of
Latin juvenis), from Celtic *yowanko-, from PIE *yeu- vital force, youthful vigor (see young).


viable (adj.)

1828, from French viable capable of life (1530s), from vie life (from Latin vita life; see vital) +
-able. Originally of newborn infants; generalized sense is first recorded 1848. Related: Viably.


sap (v.1)

dig a trench toward the enemy's position, 1590s, from Middle French saper, from sappe spade, from
Late Latin sappa spade (source also of Italian zappa, Spanish zapa spade). Extended sense weaken or
destroy insidiously is from 1755, probably influenced by the verb form of sap (n.1), on the notion
of draining the vital sap from. Related: Sapped; sapping.


convivial (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to a feast, from Late Latin convivialis, from Latin convivium a feast, from
convivere to carouse together, from com- together (see com-) + vivere to live (see vital). Meaning
sociable is from 18c. Related: Conviviality.


aught (n.1)

something, Old English awiht aught, anything, something, literally e'er a whit, from Proto-Germanic
*aiwi ever (from PIE *aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity; see eon) + *wihti thing, anything
whatever (see wight). In Shakespeare, Milton and Pope, aught and ought occur indiscriminately.


vitamin (n.)

1920, originally vitamine (1912) coined by Polish biochemist Casimir Funk (1884-1967), from Latin
vita life (see vital) + amine, because they were thought to contain amino acids. The terminal -e
formally was stripped off when scientists learned the true nature of the substance; -in was
acceptable because it was used for neutral substances of undefined composition. The lettering system
of nomenclature (Vitamin A, B, C, etc.) was introduced at the same time (1920).


hormone (n.)

1905, from Greek hormon that which sets in motion, present participle of horman impel, urge on, from
horme onset, impulse, from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- to move, set in motion. Used by Hippocrates
to denote a vital principle; modern meaning coined by English physiologist Ernest Henry Starling
(1866-1927). Jung used horme (1915) in reference to hypothetical mental energy that drives
unconscious activities and instincts. Related: Hormones.


victuals (n.)

c.1300, vitaylle (singular), from Anglo-French and Old French vitaille food, nourishment,
provisions, from Late Latin victualia provisions, noun use of plural of victualis of nourishment,
from victus livelihood, food, sustenance, that which sustains life, from past participle stem of
vivere to live (see vital). Spelling altered early 16c. to conform with Latin, but pronunciation
remains vittles.


ever (adv.)

Old English &aelig;fre ever, at any time, always; no cognates in any other Germanic language;
perhaps a contraction of a in feore, literally ever in life (the expression a to fore is common in
Old English writings).    First element is almost certainly related to Old English a always, ever,
from Proto-Germanic *aiwo, from PIE *aiw- vital force, life, long life, eternity. (see eon).
Liberman suggests second element is comparative adjectival suffix -re.


viand (n.)

article of food, early 14c., from Anglo-French viaunde, Old French viande food (vegetable as well as
animal), victuals, provisions (11c.), dissimilated from Vulgar Latin *vivanda, from Late Latin
vivenda things for living, things to be lived upon, in classical Latin, be live, neuter plural
gerundive of vivere to live (see vital). The French word later was restricted to fresh meat.


artery (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arterie, Old French artaire (13c.; Modern French art&egrave;re), and
directly from Latin arteria, from Greek arteria windpipe, also an artery, as distinct from a vein;
related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    They were regarded by the ancients as air ducts because
the arteries do not contain blood after death; medieval writers took them for the channels of the
vital spirits, and 16c. senses of artery in English include trachea, windpipe. The word is used in
reference to artery-like systems of major rivers from 1805; of railways from 1850.


viva (interj.)

1640s, from Italian viva (long) live, may he (or she) live, third person singular present
subjunctive of vivere to live, from Latin vivere to live (see vital). Probably reborrowed (1836)
from Spanish viva, from vivir to live, from Latin vivere. Sometimes also in Latin form vivat
(1660s).


stamina (n.)

1670s, rudiments or original elements of something, from Latin stamina threads, plural of stamen
(genitive staminis) thread, warp (see stamen). Sense of power to resist or recover, strength,
endurance first recorded 1726 (originally plural), from earlier meaning congenital vital capacities
of a person or animal; also in part from use of the Latin word in reference to the threads spun by
the Fates (such as queri nimio de stamine too long a thread of life), and partly from a figurative
use of Latin stamen the warp (of cloth) on the notion of the warp as the foundation of a fabric.
Related: Staminal.


age (n.)

late 13c., long but indefinite period in human history, from Old French aage (11c., Modern French
&acirc;ge) age; life, lifetime, lifespan; maturity, earlier edage, from Vulgar Latin *aetaticum
(source of Spanish edad, Italian eta, Portuguese idade age), from Latin aetatem (nominative aetas),
period of life, age, lifetime, years, from aevum lifetime, eternity, age, from PIE root *aiw- vital
force, life, long life, eternity (see eon). Meaning time something has lived, particular length or
stage of life is from early 14c. Used especially for old age since early 14c. Expelled native eld.


anthropo-

before a vowel, anthrop-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to man or human beings, from comb.
form of Greek anthropos man, human being (sometimes also including women) from Attic andra (genitive
andros), from Greek aner man (as opposed to a woman, a god, or a boy), from PIE *ner- (2) man, also
vigorous, vital, strong (cognates: Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner).   Anthropos sometimes is
explained as a compound of aner and ops (genitive opos) eye, face; so literally he who has the face
of a man. The change of -d- to -th- is difficult to explain; perhaps it is from some lost dialectal
variant, or the mistaken belief that there was an aspiration sign over the vowel in the second
element (as though *-dhropo-), which mistake might have come about by influence of common verbs such
as horao to see.


system (n.)

1610s, the whole creation, the universe, from Late Latin systema an arrangement, system, from Greek
systema organized whole, a whole compounded of parts, from stem of synistanai to place together,
organize, form in order, from syn- together (see syn-) + root of histanai cause to stand from PIE
root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Meaning set of correlated principles, facts, ideas, etc. first
recorded 1630s. Meaning animal body as an organized whole, sum of the vital processes in an organism
is recorded from 1680s; hence figurative phrase to get (something) out of one's system (1900).
Computer sense of group of related programs is recorded from 1963. All systems go (1962) is from
U.S. space program. The system prevailing social order is from 1806.


viper (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French vipere, earlier in English as vipera (c.1200), directly from Latin
vipera viper, snake, serpent, contraction of *vivipera, from vivus alive, living (see vital) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). In common with many snake species in cooler climates, in most
cases the viper's eggs are kept inside the mother until hatching.    Applied to persons of spiteful
character since at least 1590s. The only venomous snake found in Great Britain, but not especially
dangerous. The word replaced native adder. The flesh of the viper was formerly regarded as
possessing great nutritive or restorative properties, and was frequently used medicinally [OED];
hence viper-wine, wine medicated with some kind of extract from vipers, used 17c. by gray-bearded
gallants in a bid to feele new lust, and youthfull flames agin. [Massinger]


young (adj.)

Old English geong youthful, young; recent, new, fresh, from Proto-Germanic *juwunga- (cognates: Old
Saxon and Old Frisian jung, Old Norse ungr, Middle Dutch jonc, Dutch jong, Old High German and
German jung, Gothic juggs), from PIE *yuwn-ko-, suffixed form of root *yeu- vital force, youthful
vigor (cognates: Sanskrit yuva young, Latin juvenis young, Lithuanian jaunas, Old Church Slavonic
junu, Russian junyj young, Old Irish oac, Welsh ieuanc young).    From c.1830-1850, Young France,
Young Italy, etc., were loosely applied to republican agitators in various monarchies; also,
especially in Young England, Young America, used generally for typical young person of the nation.
For Young Turk, see Turk.


youth (n.)

Old English geogu&eth; youth; young people, junior warriors; young of cattle, related to geong
young, from Proto-Germanic *jugunthi- (cognates: Old Saxon juguth, Old Frisian jogethe, Middle Dutch
joghet, Dutch jeugd, Old High German jugund, German Jugend, Gothic junda youth), from suffixed form
of PIE root *yeu- vital force, youthful vigor (see young (adj.)) + Proto-Germanic abstract noun
suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    According to OED, the Proto-Germanic form apparently was altered
from *juwunthiz by influence of its contrast, *dugunthiz ability (source of Old English dugu&eth;).
In Middle English, the medial -g- became a yogh, which then disappeared.  They said that age was
truth, and that the youngMarred with wild hopes the peace of slavery[Shelley]


no

negative reply, early 13c., from Old English na (adv.) no, never, not at all, from ne not, no + a
ever. First element from Proto-Germanic *ne (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old High German ne,
Gothic ni not), from PIE root *ne no, not (see un-). Second element from PIE *aiw- vital force,
life, long life, eternity (see aye (adv.)).    As an adjective meaning not any (c.1200) it is
reduced from Old English nan (see none), the final -n omitted first before consonants and then
altogether. As a noun from c.1300. Phrase no can do it is not possible is attested from 1827, a
locution of English-speaking Chinese noted 19c. in China, Australia and West Coast of U.S.    We
repeated our advice again and again, but got no answer but a loud horse-laugh, and their national
maxim of No can do: Europe fashion no do in China. [Reminiscences of a Voyage to and from China, in
Paxton's Horticultural Register, London, 1836]    Construction no X, no Y attested from 1530s (in no
peny no pardon). No problem as an interjection of assurance first attested 1963. No way as an
expression meaning it can't be done is attested by 1968 (no way by no means is from c.1400).


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


