vivid (adj.)

1630s, from French vivide and perhaps also directly from Latin vividus spirited, animated, lively,
full of life, from vivus alive, from PIE *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Extension to colors is from
1660s. Sense of strong, distinct (as of memories, etc.) is from 1680s; that of very active or
intense (as of imagination, interest, etc.) is from 1853. Related: Vividly; vividness.


striking (adj.)

1610s, that strikes, present participle adjective from strike (v.). Meaning producing a vivid
impression id from 1752, from the verb in the sense of to catch the fancy of (1590s). Related:
Strikingly.


Vivian

masc. proper name, from Latin Vivianus (source also of French Vivien), literally living, alive, (see
vivid). But Klein says it is prob. a misreading of the Celtic name Ninian.


technicolor (n.)

vivid color, 1946, earlier as a trademark name (Technicolor, registered in U.S. 1917) for a process
of making color movies, from technical + color (n.). As an adjective from 1940.


vivisection (n.)

dissection of a living animal, 1694, from Latin vivus alive (see vivid) + ending from dissection).
Related: Vivisectionist.


Fauvist (n.)

movement in painting associated with Henri Matisse, 1915, from French fauve, wild beast (12c., in
Old French fawn-colored horse, dark-colored thing, dull, from Frankish *falw-, from the Germanic
root of fallow (adj.)). Coined by French art critic Louis Vauxcelles at Autumn Salon of 1905. It was
a reaction against impressionism, featuring vivid use of colors. Related: Fauvism.


viviparous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin viviparus bringing forth alive, from Latin vivus alive, living (see vivid) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). See viper.


vivarium (n.)

c.1600, game park, from Latin vivarium enclosure for live game, park, warren, preserve, fish pond,
noun use of neuter singular of vivarius pertaining to living creatures, from vivus alive, living
(see vivid). Meaning glass bowl for studying living creatures is from 1853.


graphic (adj.)

vivid, 1570s (implied in graphically), from Latin graphicus picturesque, from Greek graphikos of or
for writing, belonging to drawing, picturesque, from graphe writing, drawing, from graphein to write
(see -graphy). Meaning of or pertaining to drawing is from 1756. Related: Graphically. Graphic
design is attested by 1956. Graphic equalizer is from 1969.


vivify (v.)

late 14c., from Old French vivifier come alive; give life to (12c.), from Late Latin vivificare make
alive, restore to life, from vivificus enlivening, from Latin vivus alive (see vivid) + root of
facere to make (see factitious). Vivificate in same sense is recorded from early 15c.


survive (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in surviving), to outlive, continue in existence after the death of another,
originally in the legal (inheritance) sense, from Anglo-French survivre, Old French souvivre (12c.,
Modern French survivre), from Latin supervivere live beyond, live longer than, from super over,
beyond (see super-) + vivere to live (see vivid). Intransitive sense to live on is from late 15c.
Related: Survived; surviving.


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


macabre (adj.)

early 15c., originally in reference to a kind of morality show or allegorical representation of
death and his victims, from Old French (danse) Macabr&eacute; (dance) of Death (1376), of uncertain
origin, probably a translation of Medieval Latin (Chorea) Machab&aelig;orum, literally dance of the
Maccabees (leaders of the Jewish revolt against Syro-Hellenes; see Maccabees). The association with
the dance of death seems to be from vivid descriptions of the martyrdom of the Maccabees in the
Apocryphal books. The abstracted sense of gruesome is first attested 1842 in French, 1889 in
English.    The typical form which the allegory takes is that of a series of pictures, sculptured or
painted, in which Death appears, either as a dancing skeleton or as a shrunken corpse wrapped in
grave-clothes to persons representing every age and condition of life, and leads them all in a dance
to the grave. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 1911]


