vogue (n.)

1570s, the vogue, height of popularity or accepted fashion, from Middle French vogue fashion,
success; also drift, swaying motion (of a boat) literally a rowing, from Old French voguer to row,
sway, set sail (15c.), probably from a Germanic source. Compare Old High German wagon to float,
fluctuate, literally to balance oneself; German Wege wave, billow, wogen fluctuate, float (see
weigh).    Perhaps the notion is of being borne along on the waves of fashion. Italian voga a
rowing, Spanish boga rowing, but colloquially fashion, reputation also probably are from the same
Germanic source. Phrase in vogue having a prominent place in popular fashion first recorded 1643.
The fashion magazine began publication in 1892.


humbug (n.)

1751, student slang, trick, jest, hoax, deception, also as a verb, of unknown origin. A vogue word
of the early 1750s; its origin was a subject of much whimsical speculation even then.


braggadocio (n.)

Spenser's coinage, 1590, as a name for his personification of vainglory, from brag, with
augmentative ending by analogy to the Italian words then in vogue in England. In general use by 1594
for an empty swaggerer; of the talk of such persons, from 1734.


happening (n.)

mid-15c., chance, luck, from present participle of happen; meaning occurrence is 1550s. Sense of
spontaneous event or display is from 1959 in the argot of artists. Happenings events was noted by
Fowler as a vogue word from c.1905.


amusing (adj.)

c.1600, cheating; present participle adjective from amuse (v.). Sense of interesting is from 1712;
that of pleasantly entertaining, tickling to the fancy is from 1826. Noted late 1920s as a vogue
word. Amusive has been tried in all senses since 18c. and might be useful, but it never caught on.
Related: Amusingly.


skidoo (v.)

a vogue word of 1905, to leave in a hurry, perhaps a variant of skedaddle (q.v.). The association
with twenty-three is as old as the word, but the exact connection is obscure.    Then skidoo, little
girl, skidoo.  23 is the number for you.  [1906]


applesauce (n.)

by 1739, American English, from apple + sauce. Slang meaning nonsense is attested from 1921 and was
noted as a vogue word early 1920s. Mencken credits it to cartoonist T.A. (Tad) Dorgan. DAS suggests
the word was thus used because applesauce was cheap fare served in boardinghouses.


awesome (adj.)

1590s, profoundly reverential, from awe (n.) + -some (1). Meaning inspiring awe is from 1670s;
weakened colloquial sense of impressive, very good is recorded by 1961 and was in vogue from after
c.1980. Related: Awesomely; awesomeness.


hassle (n.)

1945, American English, perhaps from U.S. Southern dialectal hassle to pant, breathe noisily (1928),
of unknown origin; or perhaps from hatchel to harass (1800), which may be a variant of hazel, the
name of the plant that furnished switches for whippings. Noted in 1946 as a show biz vogue word.


ingle (n.)

fireplace, c.1500, from Scottish, probably from Gaelic aingeal fire, of uncertain origin. The vogue
for Scottish poetry in late 18c. introduced ingleside, ingle-nook to literary English.


mah-jongg (n.)

1922, from dialectal Chinese (Shanghai) ma chiang, name of the game, literally sparrows, from ma
hemp + chiang little birds. The game so called from the design of the pieces. It had a vogue in
Europe and the U.S. in the 1920s and for a time threatened to supplant bridge in popularity.


grotty (n.)

slang shortening of grotesque, it had a brief vogue 1964 as part of the argot popularized by The
Beatles in A Hard Day's Night. It unconsciously echoes Middle English groti muddy, slimy, from Old
English grotig earthy, from grot particle.


aesthete (n.)

1878, in vogue 1881, from Greek aisthetes one who perceives, from stem of aisthanesthai to perceive,
to feel (see aesthetic).    I want to be an aesthete,  And with the aesthetes stand;  A sunflower on
my forehead,  And a lily in my hand.  [Puck, Oct. 5, 1881]


gook (n.)

1899, U.S. military slang for Filipino during the insurrection there, probably from a native word,
or imitative of the babbling sound of their language to American ears (compare barbarian). The term
goo-goo eyes soft, seductive eyes was in vogue c.1900 and may have contributed to this somehow.
Extended over time to Nicaraguan (U.S. intervention there early 20c.), any Pacific Islander (World
War II), Korean (1950s), Vietnamese and any Asian (1960s).


mini (n.)

1961, abbreviation of mini-car, a small car made by British Leyland (formerly British Motor Corp.).
As an abbreviation of miniskirt, it is attested from 1966. The vogue for mini- as a prefix in
English word coinage dates from c.1960.


flabbergasted (adj.)

1772, mentioned (with bored) in a magazine article as a new vogue word, perhaps from some dialect
(in 1823 flabbergast was noted as a Sussex word), likely an arbitrary formation from flabby or
flapper and aghast.


ping-pong (n.)

1900, as Ping-Pong, trademark for table tennis equipment (Parker Brothers). Both words are imitative
of the sound of the ball hitting a hard surface; from ping + pong (attested from 1823). It had a
phenomenal vogue in U.S. c.1900-1905.


beautiful (adj.)

mid-15c., from beauty + -ful. The beautiful people the fashionable set first attested 1964 in (where
else?) Vogue (it also was the title of a 1941 play by U.S. dramatist William Saroyan). House
Beautiful is from Pilgrim's Progress, where it is a proper name of a place. Related: Beautifully.


scaramouche (n.)

1660s, name of a cowardly braggart (supposed by some to represent a Spanish don) in traditional
Italian comedy, from Italian Scaramuccia, literally skirmish, from schermire to fence, from a
Germanic source (such as Old High German skirmen defend); see skirmish (n.). According to OED, a
vogue word in late 17c. London due to the popularity of Italian actor Tiberio Fiurelli (1608-1694)
in the part.


-ville

suffix sporadically in vogue since c.1840 in U.S. colloquial word formation (such as dullsville,
palookaville), abstracted from the -ville in place names (Louisville, Greenville, etc.), from Old
French ville town, from Latin villa (see villa).


molecule (n.)

1794, extremely minute particle, from French mol&eacute;cule (1670s), from Modern Latin molecula,
diminutive of Latin moles mass, barrier (see mole (3)). A vague meaning at first; the vogue for the
word (used until late 18c. only in Latin form) can be traced to the philosophy of Descartes. First
used of Modern Latin molecula in modern scientific sense by Amedeo Avogadro (1811).


ruff (n.)

kind of large collar, stiffly starched, especially common in the seventeenth century, 1520s,
originally in reference to sleeves (of collars, from 1550s), probably a shortened form of ruffle.
Card-playing sense is a separate word, from a former game of that name (1580s), from Middle French
roffle, earlier romfle (early 15c.), from Italian ronfa, perhaps a corruption of trionfo triumph
(from French; compare trump). The game was in vogue c.1590-1630.


dandy (n.)

c.1780, of uncertain origin; it first appeared in a Scottish border ballad:I've heard my granny
crackO' sixty twa years backWhen there were sic a stock of Dandies Oetc. In that region, Dandy is
diminutive of Andrew (as it was in Middle English generally). The word was in vogue in London
c.1813-1819. His female counterpart was a dandizette (1821) with French-type ending. The adjective
dandy first recorded 1792; very popular c.1880-1900. Related: Dandified; dandify.


suffragette (n.)

female supporter of the cause of women's voting rights, 1906, from suffrage, with French fem. ending
-ette, but not in the sense in which it was in vogue at the time.   <b>suffragette</b>. A more
regrettable formation than others such as leaderette &amp; flannelette, in that it does not even
mean a sort of suffrage as they mean a sort of leader &amp; of flannel, &amp; therefore tends to
vitiate the popular conception of the termination's meaning. The word itself may now be expected to
die, having lost its importance; may its influence on word-making die with it! [Fowler, 1926]
Compare suffragist.


virtu (n.)

excellence in an object of art, passion for works of art, 1722, from Italian virtu excellence, from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) virtue, goodness, manliness (see virtue). The same word as
virtue, borrowed during a period when everything Italian was in vogue. Sometimes spelled vertu, as
though from French, but this sense of the word is not in French.


sentiment (n.)

late 14c., sentement, personal experience, one's own feeling, from Old French sentement (12c.), from
Medieval Latin sentimentum feeling, affection, opinion, from Latin sentire to feel (see sense (n.)).
Meaning what one feels about something (1630s) and modern spelling seem to be a re-introduction from
French (where it was spelled sentiment by 17c.). A vogue word mid-18c. with wide application,
commonly a thought colored by or proceeding from emotion (1762), especially as expressed in
literature or art. The 17c. sense is preserved in phrases such as my sentiments exactly.


exquisite (adj.)

early 15c., carefully selected, from Latin exquisitus carefully sought out, thus, choice, from past
participle of exquirere search out thoroughly, from ex- out (see ex-) + quaerere to seek (see query
(v.)).    Of any thing (good or bad, torture as well as art) brought to a highly wrought condition,
sometimes shading into disapproval. A vogue word 15c.-18c., given wide extensions of meaning, none
of which survives. The main modern sense of of consummate and delightful excellence is first
attested 1579, in Lyly's Euphues. Related: Exquisitely; exquisiteness. The noun meaning a dandy, fop
is from 1819.


psychological (adj.)

1680s; see psychology + -ical. Related: Psychologically. Psychological warfare recorded from 1940.
Psychological moment was in vogue from 1871, from French moment psychologique moment of immediate
expectation of something about to happen.    The original German phrase, misinterpreted by the
French &amp; imported together with its false sense into English, meant the psychic factor, the
mental effect, the influence exerted by a state of mind, &amp; not a point of time at all, das
Moment in German corresponding to our momentum, not our moment. [Fowler]


scamper (v.)

to run quickly, 1680s, probably from Flemish schampeeren, frequentative of schampen run away, from
Old North French escamper (Old French eschamper) to run away, flee, quit the battlefield, escape,
from Vulgar Latin *excampare decamp, literally leave the field, from Latin ex campo, from ex out of
(see ex-) + campo, ablative of campus field (see campus). A vogue word late 17c. Related: Scampered;
scampering. The noun is 1680s, from the verb.


decal (n.)

by 1909, shortening of decalcomania, from French d&eacute;calcomanie, from d&eacute;calquer (18c.)
transferring of a tracing from specially prepared paper to glass, porcelain, etc. (in vogue in
France 1840s, England 1862-64), from de- off + calquer to press, from Italian calcare, from Latin
calcare to tread on, press.    Time was when there were only printers employed in making the sheets
that were stuck on the ware, giving the old-time term of plain print. This form of decoration was
succeeded a few years ago by the decalcomania or decal. This decal is an imported sheet,
lithographed, and the little sprigs, flowers and scenes are cut out and stuck on the ware. [Brick,
the Leading Clay Journal, April 1909]


veep (n.)

1949, American English, apparently coined from V.P., abbreviation of vice president, perhaps modeled
on jeep, which was then in vogue. Introduced by Alben W. Barkley (1877-1956), Harry Truman's vice
president. According to the Saturday Evening Post, his grandchildren, finding Vice-President too
long, call him that. The magazines quickly picked it up, especially when the 71-year-old Barkley
married a 38-year-old widow (dubbed the Veepess).    Barkley says word Veep is not copyrighted, and
any vice president who wants to can use it. But he hopes not many will. [U.S. Department of State
wireless bulletin, 1949]    Time, tongue in cheek, suggested the president should be Peep, the
Secretary of State Steep, and the Secretary of Labor Sleep.


bop (n.)

1948, shortening of bebop or rebop; as a verb, play bop music, play (a song) in a bop style, from
1948. It soon came to mean do any sort of dance to pop music (1956). Related: Bopped; bopping.
The musical movement had its own lingo, which was in vogue in U.S. early 1950s. Life magazine [Sept.
29, 1952] listed examples of bop talk: crazy new, wonderful, wildly exciting; gone (adj.) the tops--
superlative of crazy; cool (adj.) tasty, pretty; goof to blow a wrong note or make a mistake;
hipster modern version of hepcat; dig to understand, appreciate the subtleties of; stoned drunk,
captivated, ecstatic, sent out of this world; flip (v.) to react enthusiastically. [Life Sept. 29,
1952]


rage (n.)

c.1300, madness, insanity; fit of frenzy; anger, wrath; fierceness in battle; violence of storm,
fire, etc., from Old French rage, raige spirit, passion, rage, fury, madness (11c.), from Medieval
Latin rabia, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (compare rabies,
which originally had this sense), from PIE *rebh- violent, impetuous (cognates: Old English rabbian
to rage). Similarly, Welsh (cynddaredd) and Breton (kounnar) words for rage, fury originally meant
hydrophobia and are compounds based on the word for dog (Welsh ci, plural cwn; Breton ki). In
15c.-16c. it also could mean rabies. The rage fashion, vogue dates from 1785.


bore (v.1)

Old English borian to bore through, perforate, from bor auger, from Proto-Germanic *buron (cognates:
Old Norse bora, Swedish borra, Old High German boron, Middle Dutch boren, German bohren), from PIE
root *bher- (2) to cut with a sharp point, pierce, bore (cognates: Greek pharao I plow, Latin forare
to bore, pierce, Old Church Slavonic barjo to strike, fight, Albanian brime hole).    The meaning
diameter of a tube is first recorded 1570s; hence figurative slang full bore (1936) at maximum
speed, from notion of unchoked carburetor on an engine. Sense of be tiresome or dull first attested
1768, a vogue word c.1780-81 according to Grose (1785); possibly a figurative extension of to move
forward slowly and persistently, as a boring tool does.


bogey (n.2)

in golfing, c.1891, originally number of strokes a good player is supposed to need for a given hole
or course; later, score one over par (1946); from the same source as bogey (n.1), on the notion of a
phantom opponent, represented by the ground score. The word was in vogue at the time in Britain
because of the popularity of a music hall tune Hush, Hush, Hush, Here Comes the Bogey Man.One
popular song at least has left its permanent effect on the game of golf. That song is 'The Bogey
Man.' In 1890 Dr. Thos. Browne, R.N., the hon. secretary of the Great Yarmouth Club, was playing
against a Major Wellman, the match being against the 'ground score,' which was the name given to the
scratch value of each hole. The system of playing against the 'ground score' was new to Major
Wellman, and he exclaimed, thinking of the song of the moment, that his mysterious and well-nigh
invincible opponent was a regular 'bogey-man.' The name 'caught on' at Great Yarmouth, and to-day
'Bogey' is one of the most feared opponents on all the courses that acknowledge him. [1908, cited in
OED]  Other early golfing sources give it an American origin. As a verb, attested by 1948.


dude (n.)

1883, fastidious man, New York City slang of unknown origin; recent research suggests it is a
shortening of Yankee Doodle, based on the song's notion of foppish, over-fastidious male (compare
macaroni). The vogue word of 1883, originally used in reference to the devotees of the aesthetic
craze, later applied to city slickers, especially Easterners vacationing in the West (as in dude
ranch, first recorded 1921).    Now, tenderfoot is not to be construed as the Western equivalent of
that much evolved and more abused specimen of mankind, familiarly styled dude. For even the Montana
cowboy recognizes the latter. Not that he has ever seen the true prototype of a class that was
erstwhile so numerous among us. But he is convinced that a person caught in the act of wearing a
white linen collar, and who looks as though he might have recently shaved or washed his face, must
be a dude, true and proper. [Random Notes and Observations of a Trip through the Great Northwest,
The Medical Record, Oct. 20, 1883]    Application to any male is recorded by 1966, U.S., originally
in Black English.


polka (n.)

1844, from French polka, German Polka, probably from Czech polka, the dance, literally Polish woman
(Polish Polka), fem. of Polak a Pole. The word might also be an alteration of Czech pulka half, for
the half-steps of Bohemian peasant dances. Or it could be a merger of the two. The dance was in
vogue first in Prague, 1835; it reached London by the spring of 1842.   Vous n'en &#234;tes encore
qu'au galop, vieil arri&#233;r&#233;, et nous en sommes &#224; la polka! Oui, c'est la polka que
nous avons dans&#233;e &#224; ce fameux bal Valenlino. Vous demandez ce que c'est que la polka,
homme de l ann&#233;e derni&#232;re! La contredanse a v&#233;cu; le galop, rococo; la valse &#224;
deux temps, dans le troisi&#232;me dessous; il n'y a plus que la polka, la sublime, l'enivrante
polka, dont les salons raffolent, que les femmes de la haute, les banqui&#233;res les plus cossues
et les comtesses les plus choenosophoses &#233;tudient jour et nuit. [La France Dramatique, Paris,
1841]    As a verb by 1846 (polk also was tried).


California

name of an imaginary realm in Las sergas de Esplandi&aacute;n (Exploits of Esplad&aacute;n), a
romance by Spanish writer Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo, published in 1510. It was a
sequel to his Amadis de Gaula, and was said to have been influential among Spanish explorers of the
New World. It could have led them to misidentify Baja California as this mythical land and to
mistake it for an island. The Amadis tales are the Iberian equivalent of the Arthurian romances;
they are older than 1510 (traces of them have been found mid-14c.) and were wildly popular. That
conquistadors and sailors would have known the story in all its imaginative detail is hardly
surprising.   Amadis de Gaula ... set a fashion: all later Spanish writers of books of chivalry
adopted the machinery of Amadis de Gaula. Later knights were not less brave (they could not be
braver than) Amadis; heroines were not less lovely (they could not be lovelier) than Oriana; there
was nothing for it but to make the dragons more appalling, the giants larger, the wizards craftier,
the magic castles more inaccessible, the enchanted lakes deeper. Subsequent books of chivalry are
simple variants of the types in Amadis de Gaula: Cervantes made his barber describe it as 'the best
of all books of this kind.' This verdict is essentially just. Amadis de Gaula was read everywhere,
especially in the French version of Herberay des Essarts. It was done into Hebrew during the
sixteenth century, and attracted readers as different as St Ignatius of Loyola and Henry of Navarre.
Its vogue perhaps somewhat exceeded its merit, but its merits are not inconsiderable. [James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Spanish Literature, 1922 edition]    Where Montalvo got the name and what it
means, if anything, is a mystery. Californian is attested from 1785. The element Californium (1950)
was named in reference to University of California, where it was discovered.


