volatile (adj.)

1590s fine or light, also evaporating rapidly (c.1600), from Middle French volatile, from Latin
volatilis fleeting, transitory; swift, rapid; flying, winged, from past participle stem of volare to
fly (see volant). Sense of readily changing, flighty, fickle is first recorded 1640s. Volatiles in
Middle English meant birds, butterflies, and other winged creatures (c.1300).


sal volatile (n.)

1650s, Modern Latin, literally volatile salt (see salt (n.) + volatile); ammonium carbonate,
especially as used in reviving persons who have fainted.


non-volatile (adj.)

also nonvolatile, 1837, from non- + volatile.


volatility (n.)

1620s, noun from volatile (adj.).


acetone (n.)

colorless volatile liquid, 1839, literally a derivative of acetic acid, from Latin acetum vinegar
(see acetic) + Greek-based chemical suffix -one, which owes its use in chemistry to this word.


hellcat (n.)

also hell-cat, volatile woman, c.1600, from hell + cat.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


chloroform (n.)

trichloromethane, volatile liquid used as an anaesthetic, 1835, from French chloroforme, a hybrid
coined 1834 by French chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1800-1884) from chlor-, comb. form meaning
chlorine + formique formic (acid) (see formic (adj.)). As a verb, from 1848, the year its
anaesthetic properties were discovered. Related: Chloroformed.


mercurial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the planet Mercury (see Mercury). Meaning sprightly, volatile, quick
(1590s) is from supposed qualities of those born under the planet Mercury (they also are the
qualities of the god Mercury), probably also partly by association with the qualities of
quicksilver. A variant in this sense was mercurious (1590s). Related: Mercurially; mercuriality.


ammonia (n.)

1799, Modern Latin, coined 1782 by Swedish chemist Torbern Bergman (1735-1784) for gas obtained from
sal ammoniac, salt deposits containing ammonium chloride found near temple of Jupiter Ammon (from
Egyptian God Amun) in Libya, from Greek ammoniakos belonging to Ammon. The shrine was ancient
already in Augustus' day, and the salts were prepared from the sands where the camels waited while
their masters prayed for good omens [Shipley].    There also was a gum form of sal ammoniac, from a
wild plant that grew near the shrine, and across North Africa and Asia. A less likely theory traces
the name to Greek Armeniakon Armenian, because the substance also was found in Armenia. Also known
as spirit of hartshorn and volatile or animal alkali.


smoke (n.1)

late Old English smoca (rare) fumes and volatile material given off by burning substances, related
to smeocan give off smoke, from Proto-Germanic *smuk- (cognates: Middle Dutch smooc, Dutch smook,
Middle High German smouch, German Schmauch), from PIE root *smeug- to smoke; smoke (cognates:
Armenian mux smoke, Greek smykhein to burn with smoldering flame, Old Irish much, Welsh mwg smoke).
The more usual noun was Old English smec, which became dialectal smeech. Abusive meaning black
person attested from 1913, American English. Smoke-eater firefighter is c.1930. Figurative phrase go
up in smoke be destroyed (as if by fire) is from 1933. Smoke alarm first attested 1936; smoke-
detector from 1957.


ether (n.)

late 14c., upper regions of space, from Old French ether and directly from Latin aether the upper
pure, bright air, from Greek aither upper air; bright, purer air; the sky, from aithein to burn,
shine, from PIE root *aidh- to burn (see edifice).    In ancient cosmology, the element that filled
all space beyond the sphere of the moon, constituting the substance of the stars and planets.
Conceived of as a purer form of fire or air, or as a fifth element. From 17c.-19c., it was the
scientific word for an assumed frame of reference for forces in the universe, perhaps without
material properties. The concept was shaken by the Michelson-Morley experiment (1887) and discarded
after the Theory of Relativity won acceptance, but before it went it gave rise to the colloquial use
of ether for the radio (1899).    The name also was bestowed c.1730 (Frobenius; in English by 1757)
on a volatile chemical compound known since 14c. for its lightness and lack of color (its anesthetic
properties weren't fully established until 1842).


