voracious (adj.)

1630s, formed as an adjectival form of voracity. Related: Voraciously; voraciousness.


bulimic (adj.)

1854, voracious; see bulimia + -ic. Meaning suffering from bulimia nervosa is recorded from 1977.
The noun in this sense is from 1980.


ravening (adj.)

voracious, 1520s, present participle adjective from an extinct verb raven to prey, to plunder,
devour greedily (late 14c., implied in ravener), from Old French raviner (see ravenous). It is not
etymologically related to raven (n.).


shark (n.)

1560s, of uncertain origin; apparently the word and the first specimen were brought to London by
Capt. John Hawkins's second expedition (landed 1565; see Hakluyt).  There is no proper name for it
that I knowe, but that sertayne men of Captayne Haukinses doth call it a 'sharke' [handbill
advertising an exhibition of the specimen, 1569]    The meaning dishonest person who preys on
others, though attested only from 1599 (sharker artful swindler in this sense is from 1594), may be
the original sense, later transferred to the large, voracious marine fish. If so, it is possibly
from German Schorck, a variant of Schurke scoundrel, villain, agent noun of Middle High German
sch&uuml;rgen (German sch&uuml;ren) to poke, stir.    But on another theory, the English word is
from a Mayan word, xoc, which might have meant shark. Northern Europeans seem not to have been
familiar with sharks before voyages to the tropics began. A slightly earlier name for it in English
was tiburon, via Spanish (where it is attested by 1520s), from the Carib name for the fish.    The
English word was applied (or re-applied) to voracious or predatory persons, on the image of the
fish, from 1707 (originally of pick-pockets); loan shark is attested from 1905. Sharkskin (1851) was
used for binding books, etc. As the name of a type of fabric held to resemble it, it is recorded
from 1932.    There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called by sailors; a grasping,
rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our
steering oar. [Herman Melville, Mardi]


edacious (adj.)

1829, from Latin edaci-, stem of edax voracious, gluttonous, from edere to eat (see edible) + -ous.
Related: Edacity (1620s).


ravenous (adj.)

late 14c., obsessed with plundering, extremely greedy, from Old French ravinos, of people,
rapacious, violent, of water, swift-flowing, from raviner to seize, from ravine violent rush,
robbery (see ravine). Meaning voracious, very hungry is from early 15c. Related: Ravenously;
ravenousness.


pike (n.3)

voracious freshwater fish, early 14c., probably short for pike-fish, a special use of pike (n.2) in
reference to the fish's long, pointed jaw, and in part from French brochet pike (fish), from broche
a roasting spit.


Tasmania (n.)

1853, named for Dutch navigator Abel Tasman (1603-1659), who discovered it in 1642. It was called by
him Van Diemen's Land for the Dutch governor-general of the East Indies. The Tasmanian devil so
called since at least 1829, from its propensity for killing young lambs (other voracious fish or
animals also have been named devil).


Excalibur (n.)

King Arthur's sword, c.1300, from Old French Escalibor, corruption of Caliburn, in Geoffrey of
Monmouth (c.1140) Caliburnus, apparently from Welsh Caledvwlch probably a variant of the legendary
Irish sword name Caladbolg which might mean literally hard-belly, i.e. voracious. For first element,
see callus; for second, see belly (n.).


greedy (adj.)

Old English gr&aelig;dig (West Saxon), gredig (Anglian) voracious, also covetous, from Proto-
Germanic *gr&aelig;dagaz (cognates: Old Saxon gradag greedy, Old Norse gra&eth;r greed, hunger,
Danish graadig, Dutch gretig, Old High German gratag greedy, Gothic gredags hungry), from
*gr&aelig;duz (cognates: Gothic gredus hunger, Old English gr&aelig;dum eagerly), possibly from PIE
root *gher- to like, want (source of Sanskrit grdh to be greedy).    In Greek, the word was
philargyros, literally money-loving. A German word for it is habs&uuml;chtig, from haben to have +
sucht sickness, disease, with sense tending toward passion for.


wolf (n.)

Old English wulf wolf, wolfish person, devil, from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (cognates: Old Saxon wulf,
Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root
*wlkwo- wolf (cognates: Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k; Old Church Slavonic vluku;
Russian volcica; Lithuanian vilkas wolf; Old Persian Varkana- Hyrcania, district southeast of the
Caspian Sea, literally wolf-land; probably also Greek lykos, Latin lupus).    This manne can litle
skyl ... to saue himself harmlesse from the perilous accidentes of this world, keping ye wulf from
the doore (as they cal it). [The Institution of a Gentleman, 1555]    Probably extinct in England
from the end of the 15th century; in Scotland from the early 18th. Wolves as a symbol of lust are
ancient, such as Roman slang lupa whore, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian
lupa, French louve). The equation of wolf and prostitute, sexually voracious female persisted into
12c., but by Elizabethan times wolves had become primarily symbolic of male lust. The specific use
of wolf for sexually aggressive male first recorded 1847; wolf-whistle attested by 1945, American
English, at first associated with sailors. The image of a wolf in sheep's skin is attested from
c.1400. See here for a discussion of wolf in Indo-European history. The wolf-spider so called for
prowling and leaping on its prey rather than waiting in a web.


