voucher (n.)

1520s, originally summoning of a person into court to warrant the title to a property, a calling to
vouch; see vouch. Meaning receipt from a business transaction is first attested 1690s; sense of
document which can be exchanged for goods or services is attested from 1947.


vouchsafe (v.)

c.1300, vouchen safe to vouch as safe, guarantee (see vouch and safe (adj.)).


vouch (v.)

early 14c., summon into court to prove a title, from Anglo-French voucher, Old French vocher to
call, summon, invoke, claim, probably from Gallo-Roman *voticare, metathesis of Latin vocitare to
call to, summon insistently, frequentative of Latin vocare to call, call upon, summon (see voice
(n.)). Meaning guarantee to be true or accurate is first attested 1590s. Related: Vouched; vouching.


avouch (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French avochier call upon as authority, in Old French call (to court),
advocate, plead (a case), from Latin advocare call to as a witness (see advocate).   Avouch, which
is no longer in common use, means guarantee, solemnly aver, prove by assertion, maintain the truth
or existence of, vouch for .... Avow means own publicly to, make no secret of, not shrink from
admitting, acknowledge one's responsibility for .... Vouch is now common only in the phrase vouch
for, which has taken the place of avouch in ordinary use, &amp; means pledge one's word for ....
[Fowler]    Related: Avouched; avouching.


certify (v.)

mid-14c., to declare the truth of, also to vouch for or confirm (an official record, etc.), from Old
French certefiier make certain, witness the truth of (12c.), from Late Latin certificare to certify,
to make certain, from Latin certus (see certain) + root of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also
used in Middle English in broader senses of inform, give notice; instruct, to direct; to designate.
Related: Certified; certifying. Certified public accountant attested from 1896.


pledge (n.)

mid-14c., surety, bail, from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) hostage, security, bail,
probably from Frankish *plegan to guarantee, from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning have
responsibility for (cognates: Old Saxon plegan vouch for, Middle Dutch plien to answer for,
guarantee, Old High German pflegan to care for, be accustomed to, Old English pleon to risk the loss
of, expose to danger; see plight (v.)).    Meaning allegiance vow attested by drinking with another
is from 1630s. Sense of solemn promise first recorded 1814, though this notion is from 16c. in the
verb. Weekley notes the curious contradiction in pledge (v.) to toast with a drink (1540s) and
pledge (n.) the vow to abstain from drinking (1833). Meaning student who has agreed to join a
fraternity or sorority dates from 1901.


play (v.)

Old English plegan, plegian move rapidly, occupy or busy oneself, exercise; frolic; make sport of,
mock; perform music, from West Germanic *plegan occupy oneself about  (cognates: Old Saxon plegan
vouch for, take charge of, Old Frisian plega tend to, Middle Dutch pleyen to rejoice, be glad,
German pflegen take care of, cultivate), from PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself, forming words in
Celtic, Germanic, Slavic, and possibly Latin.    Meaning to take part in a game is from c.1200.
Opposed to work (v.) since late 14c. Related: Played; playing. To play up emphasize is from 1909; to
play down minimize is from 1930; to play along cooperate is from 1929. To play with oneself
masturbate is from 1896; play for keeps is from 1861, originally of marbles or other children's
games with tokens. To play second fiddle in the figurative sense is from 1809 (Gil Blas). To play
into the hands (of someone) is from 1705. To play the _______ card is attested from 1886; to play
fair is from mid-15c. To play (something) safe is from 1911; to play favorites is attested from
1902. For play the field see field (n.).


