vulgarian (n.)

rich person of vulgar manners, 1804, from vulgar (adj.) + -ian.


vulgarize (v.)

to make vulgar (transitive), 1709, from vulgar + -ize. Related: Vulgarized; vulgarizing.


vulgar (adj.)

late 14c., common, ordinary, from Latin vulgaris, volgaris of or pertaining to the common people,
common, vulgar, low, mean, from vulgus the common people, multitude, crowd, throng, perhaps from a
PIE root *wel- to crowd, throng (cognates: Sanskrit vargah division, group, Greek eilein to press,
throng, Middle Breton gwal'ch abundance, Welsh gwala sufficiency, enough) [not in Watkins]. Meaning
coarse, low, ill-bred is first recorded 1640s, probably from earlier use (with reference to people)
with meaning belonging to the ordinary class (1530). Related: Vulgarly.


vulgarity (n.)

1570s, the common people, from Middle French vulgarit&#233; and directly from Late Latin vulgaritas
the multitude, from vulgaris (see vulgar). Meaning coarseness, crudeness is recorded from 1774.


inquest (n.)

late 13c., an-queste legal or judicial inquiry, from Old French enqueste inquiry, from Vulgar Latin
*inquaestia (source also of Italian inchiesta), from fem. past participle of Vulgar Latin *inquirere
inquire (see inquire).


apparel (v.)

mid-13c., to equip (in any way), from Old French apareillier (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*appariculare. This is either from Latin apparare prepare, make ready (see apparatus), or from
Vulgar Latin *ad-particulare to put things together. The meaning to attire in proper clothing is
from mid-14c. Cognate with Italian aparecchiare, Spanish aparejar, Portuguese aparelhar. Related:
Appareled; apparelled; appareling; apparelling.


retina (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin retina the retina, probably from Vulgar Latin (tunica) *retina,
literally net-like tunic, on resemblance to the network of blood vessels at the back of the eye, and
ultimately from Latin rete net (see reticulate (adj.)). The Vulgar Latin phrase might be Gerard of
Cremona's 12c. translation of Arabic (tabaqa) shabakiyyah netlike (layer), itself probably a
translation of Greek amphiblestroeides (khiton).


piss (v.)

late 13c., from Old French pissier urinate (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *pissiare, of imitative origin.
To piss away (money, etc.) is from 1948. Related: Pissed; pissing. Pissing while (1550s) once meant
a short time.    He shall not piss my money against the wall; he shall not have my money to spend in
liquor. [Grose, Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd edition, 1796]


escapade (n.)

1650s, an escape from confinement, from French escapade (16c.) a prank or trick, from Spanish
escapada a prank, flight, an escape, noun use of fem. past participle of escapar to escape, from
Vulgar Latin *excappare (see escape). Or perhaps the French word is via Italian scappata, from
scappare, from the same Vulgar Latin source. Figurative sense (1814) is of breaking loose from rules
or restraints on behavior.


fusilier (n.)

1670s, soldier armed with a musket, from French fusilier, from Old French fusil musket, earlier
steel for a tinderbox, from Vulgar Latin *focilis (petra) (stone) producing fire, from Latin focus
hearth, in Vulgar Latin fire (see focus (n.)). Retained by certain regiments of the British army
that were formerly armed with fusils.


velvet (n.)

early 14c., probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al veluet, from Vulgar Latin *villutittus, diminutive of
Vulgar Latin *villutus velvet, literally shaggy cloth, from Latin villus shaggy hair, nap of cloth,
tuft of hair, probably a dialectal variant of vellus fleece, from PIE *wel-no-, suffixed form of
root *wel- (4) to tear, pull (see svelte).


bound (v.2)

to leap, 1580s, from French bondir to rebound, resound, echo, from Old French bondir to leap,
rebound; make a noise, beat (a drum), 13c., ultimately to echo back, from Vulgar Latin *bombitire to
buzz, hum (see bomb (n.)), perhaps on model of Old French tentir, from Vulgar Latin *tinnitire.


pigeon (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. as a surname), from Old French pigeon young dove (13c.), probably from Vulgar
Latin *pibionem, dissimilation from Late Latin pipionem (nominative pipio) squab, young chirping
bird (3c.), from pipire to peep, chirp, of imitative origin. Meaning one easily duped is from 1590s.
Replaced culver (Old English culufre, from Vulgar Latin *columbra, from Latin columbula) and native
dove.


burgeon (v.)

early 14c., grow, sprout, blossom, from Anglo-French burjuner, Old French borjoner to bud, sprout,
from borjon a bud, shoot, pimple (Modern French bourgeon), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Vulgar
Latin *burrionem (nominative *burrio), from Late Latin burra flock of wool, itself of uncertain
origin. Some sources (Kitchin, Gamillscheg) say either the French word or the Vulgar Latin one is
from Germanic. The English verb is perhaps instead a native development from burjoin (n.) a bud
(c.1300), from Old French. Related: Burgeoned; burgeoning.


marvel (n.)

c.1300, miracle, also wonderful story or legend, from Old French merveille a wonder, surprise,
miracle, from Vulgar Latin *miribilia (also source of Spanish maravilla, Portuguese maravilha,
Italian maraviglia), altered from Latin mirabilia wonderful things, from neuter plural of mirabilis
wonderful, marvelous, extraordinary; strange, singular, from mirari to wonder at, from mirus
wonderful (see smile). A neuter plural treated in Vulgar Latin as a feminine singular. Related:
Marvels.


medal (n.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;daille (15c.), from Italian medaglia a medal, according to OED
from Vulgar Latin *metallea (moneta) metal (coin), from Latin metallum (see metal). The other theory
[Klein, Barnhart, Watkins] is that medaglia originally meant coin worth half a denarius, and is from
Vulgar Latin *medalia, from Late Latin medialia little halves, neuter plural of medialis of the
middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally a trinket or charm; as a reward for merit, proficiency, etc.,
attested from 1751.


flavor (n.)

c.1300, a smell, odor (usually a pleasing one), from Old French flaour smell, odor, from Vulgar
Latin flator odor, literally that which blows, from Latin flator blower, from flare to blow, puff,
which is cognate with Old English blawan (see blow (v.1)).    The same Vulgar Latin source produced
Old Italian fiatore a bad odor. Sense of taste, savor is 1690s, perhaps 1670s; originally the
element in taste which depends on the sense of smell. The -v- is perhaps from influence of savor.


yer

representing a dialectal or vulgar pronunciation of your, attested from 1814.


old hat (adj.)

out of date, first recorded 1911. As a noun phrase, however, it had different sense previously. The
Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue (1796) defines it as, a woman's privities, because
frequently felt.


alms (n.)

Old English &aelig;lmesse alms, almsgiving, from Proto-Germanic *alemosna (cognates: Old Saxon
alamosna, Old High German alamuosan, Old Norse &ouml;lmusa), an early borrowing of Vulgar Latin
*alemosyna (source of Old Spanish almosna, Old French almosne, Italian limosina), from Church Latin
eleemosyna (Tertullian, 3c.), from Greek eleemosyne pity, mercy, in Ecclesiastical Greek charity,
alms, from eleemon compassionate, from eleos pity, mercy, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative of
cries for alms. Spelling perversion in Vulgar Latin is perhaps by influence of alimonia.


Sol (n.)

the sun personified, mid-15c. (also in Old English), from Latin sol the sun, sunlight, from PIE
*s(e)wol-, variant of root *saewel- the sun (cognates: Sanskrit suryah, Avestan hvar sun, light,
heavens; Greek helios; Lithuanian saule; Old Church Slavonic slunice; Gothic sauil, Old English sol
sun, swegl sky, heavens, the sun; Welsh haul, Old Cornish heuul, Breton heol sun; Old Irish suil
eye).    The PIE element -*el- in the root originally was a suffix and had an alternative form
-*en-, yielding *s(u)wen-, source of English sun (n.). French soleil (10c.) is from Vulgar Latin
*soliculus, diminutive of sol; in Vulgar Latin diminutives had the full meaning of their principal
words.


rantallion (n.)

One whose scrotum is so relaxed as to be longer than his penis, i. e. whose shot pouch is longer
than the barrel of his piece. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1785]


cater (v.)

provide food for, c.1600, from Middle English catour (n.) buyer of provisions (c.1400; late 13c. as
a surname), a shortening of Anglo-French achatour buyer (Old North French acatour, Old French
achatour, 13c., Modern French acheteur), from Old French achater to buy, originally to buy
provisions, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *accaptare, from Latin ad- to + captare to take, hold,
frequentative of capere to take (see capable).    Or else from Vulgar Latin *accapitare to add to
one's capital, with second element from verbal stem of Latin caput (genitive capitis); see capital
(adj.). Figuratively from 1650s. Related: Catered; catering.


priest (n.)

Old English preost probably shortened from the older Germanic form represented by Old Saxon and Old
High German prestar, Old Frisian prestere, all from Vulgar Latin *prester priest, from Late Latin
presbyter presbyter, elder, from Greek presbyteros (see Presbyterian).    An alternative theory (to
account for the -eo- of the Old English word) makes it cognate with Old High German priast, prest,
from Vulgar Latin *prevost one put over others, from Latin praepositus person placed in charge, from
past participle of praeponere (see provost). In Old Testament sense, a translation of Hebrew kohen,
Greek hiereus, Latin sacerdos.


cherry (n.)

c.1300, earlier in surname Chyrimuth (1266, literally Cherry-mouth); from Anglo-French cherise, from
Old North French cherise (Old French, Modern French cerise, 12c.), from Vulgar Latin *ceresia, from
late Greek kerasian cherry, from Greek kerasos cherry tree, possibly from a language of Asia Minor.
Mistaken in Middle English for a plural and stripped of its -s (compare pea).     Old English had
ciris cherry from a West Germanic borrowing of the Vulgar Latin word (cognate with German Kirsch),
but it died out after the Norman invasion and was replaced by the French word. Meaning maidenhead,
virginity is from 1889, U.S. slang, from supposed resemblance to the hymen, but perhaps also from
the long-time use of cherries as a symbol of the fleeting quality of life's pleasures.


oi

1962, vulgar or working class pronunciation of hoy a call or shout to attract attention.


jazzbo (n.)

1917, low, vulgar jazz, from jazz. Later in 20c. in use as a derogatorty term for persons,
especially blacks.


task (n.)

early 14c., a quantity of labor imposed as a duty, from Old North French tasque (12c., Old French
tasche, Modern French t&acirc;che) duty, tax, from Vulgar Latin *tasca a duty, assessment,
metathesis of Medieval Latin taxa, a back-formation of Latin taxare to evaluate, estimate, assess
(see tax (v.)). General sense of any piece of work that has to be done is first recorded 1590s.
Phrase take one to task (1680s) preserves the sense that is closer to tax.    German tasche pocket
is from the same Vulgar Latin source (via Old High German tasca), with presumable sense evolution
from amount of work imposed by some authority, to payment for that work, to wages, to pocket into
which money is put, to any pocket.


brummagem (adj.)

cheap and showy, 19c., from a noun, from the vulgar pronunciation of Birmingham, England, in
reference to articles mass-manufactured there. The word also recalls Birmingham's old reputation for
counterfeiting.


rout (n.)

1590s, disorderly retreat following a defeat, from Middle French route disorderly flight of troops,
literally a breaking off, rupture, from Vulgar Latin rupta a dispersed group, literally a broken
group, from noun use of Latin rupta, fem. past participle of rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)).
The archaic English noun rout group of persons, assemblage, is the same word, from Anglo-French
rute, Old French route host, troop, crowd, from Vulgar Latin rupta a dispersed group, here with
sense of a division, a detachment. It first came to English meaning group of soldiers (early 13c.),
also gang of outlaws or rioters, mob (c.1300) before the more general sense developed 14c. Also as a
legal term. A rout-cake (1807) was one baked for use at a reception.


pluck (v.)

late Old English ploccian, pluccian pull off, cull, from West Germanic *plokken (cognates: Middle
Low German plucken, Middle Dutch plocken, Dutch plukken, Flemish plokken, German pfl&#252;cken),
perhaps from Vulgar Latin *piluccare (source of Old French peluchier, late 12c.; Italian piluccare),
a frequentative, ultimately from Latin pilare pull out hair, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)). But
despite the similarities, OED finds difficulties with this and cites gaps in historical evidence.
Related: Plucked; plucking.  To pluck a rose, an expression said to be used by women for going to
the necessary house, which in the country usually stands in the garden. [F. Grose, Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]This euphemistic use is attested from 1610s. To pluck up
summon up is from c.1300.


unbeknownst (adj.)

1833, vulgar formation from unbeknown (1630s). No clear reason for the -st, but since 19c. this has
become the dominant form.


Madge

pet form of fem. proper name Margaret.    MADGE. The private parts of a woman. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]


kitchen (n.)

c.1200, from Old English cycene, from Proto-Germanic *kokina (cognates: Middle Dutch c&ouml;kene,
Old High German chuhhina, German K&uuml;che, Danish kj&oslash;kken), probably borrowed from Vulgar
Latin *cocina (source also of French cuisine, Spanish cocina), variant of Latin coquina kitchen,
from fem. of coquinus of cooks, from coquus cook, from coquere to cook (see cook (n.)).    The Old
English word might be directly from Vulgar Latin. Kitchen cabinet informal but powerful set of
advisors is American English slang, 1832, originally in reference to administration of President
Andrew Jackson. Kitchen midden (1863) in archaeology translates Danish kj&oslash;kken
m&oslash;dding. Surname Kitchener (one in charge of a monastic kitchen) is from early 14c. Old
English also had cycen&#240;enung service in the kitchen.


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


caramba

exclamation of dismay or surprise, 1835, from Spanish, said to be a euphemism for carajo penis, from
Vulgar Latin *caraculum little arrow.


underbred (adj.)

of inferior breeding, vulgar, 1640s, from under + past participle of breed (v.). Of animals, not
pure bred, attested from 1890.


uphill (adj.)

1610s, from up + hill. As an adverb from c.1600. Grose's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue (1785) has
Uphills, false dice that run high.


cavalier (n.)

1580s, from Italian cavalliere mounted soldier, knight; gentleman serving as a lady's escort, from
Late Latin caballarius horseman, from Vulgar Latin caballus, the common Vulgar Latin word for horse
(and source of Italian cavallo, French cheval, Spanish caballo, Irish capall, Welsh ceffyl),
displacing Latin equus (see equine).    Sense advanced in 17c. to knight, then courtly gentleman
(but also, pejoratively, swaggerer), which led to the adjectival senses, especially disdainful
(1650s). Meaning Royalist adherent of Charles I is from 1641. Meaning one who devotes himself solely
to attendance on a lady is from 1817, roughly translating Italian cavaliere-servente. In classical
Latin caballus was work horse, pack horse, sometimes, disdainfully, hack, nag. Not a native Lat.
word (as the second -a- would show), though the source of the borrowing is uncertain [Tucker].
Perhaps from some Balkan or Anatolian language, and meaning, originally, gelding. The same source is
thought to have yielded Old Church Slavonic kobyla.


Sabbath (n.)

Old English sabat Saturday as a day of rest, as observed by the Jews, from Latin sabbatum, from
Greek sabbaton, from Hebrew shabbath, properly day of rest, from shabath he rested. Spelling with
-th attested from late 14c., not widespread until 16c.    The Babylonians regarded seventh days as
unlucky, and avoided certain activities then; the Jewish observance might have begun as a similar
custom. Among European Christians, from the seventh day of the week it began to be applied early
15c. to the first day (Sunday), though no definite law, either divine or ecclesiastical, directed
the change [Century Dictionary], but elaborate justifications have been made. The change was driven
by Christians' celebration of the Lord's resurrection on the first day of the week, a change
completed during the Reformation.    The original meaning is preserved in Spanish Sabado, Italian
Sabbato, and other languages' names for Saturday. Hungarian szombat, Rumanian simbata, French
samedi, German Samstag Saturday are from Vulgar Latin sambatum, from Greek *sambaton, a vulgar
nasalized variant of sabbaton. Sabbath-breaking attested from 1650s.


cotquean (n.)

1540s, obsolete, housewife of a cot, from cot (see cottage) + quean; hence a vulgar beldam, scold
[OED]; also used contemptuously (by Shakespeare, etc.) of men seen as overly interested in
housework.


leastways

1825, colloquial, from least + way (n.). Regarded as vulgar, but simply a one-word form of Chaucer's
leest weye (late 14c.).


snatch (n.)

c.1300, a trap, snare, from snatch (v.). Meaning a sudden grab is from 1570s; that of a small amount
is from 1590s. Sense in weight-lifting is from 1928. Vulgar slang sense of vulva is recorded from
1903; a much older venereal sense was sexual intercourse quickly performed (1580s).


sheeney (n.)

a Jew, 1816, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Russian zhid, Polish &#380;yd, Czech zid a Jew.
Now a vulgar term of abuse, but used before c.1870 by Jews and Gentiles without intent of insult.


bunting (n.1)

flag material, 1742, perhaps from Middle English bonting gerundive of bonten to sift, because cloth
was used for sifting grain, via Old French, from Vulgar Latin *bonitare to make good.


rascality (n.)

low and vulgar people collectively, 1570s; character of a rascal, 1590s, from rascal + -ity.


banister (n.)

1660s, unexplained corruption of baluster. As late as 1830 condemned as vulgar, it is now accepted.
Surname Bannister is from Old French banastre basket, hence, basket-maker.


shivaree (n.)

1843, earlier sherrie-varrie (1805), alteration of charivari. Century Dictionary describes it as
vulgar, southern U.S.; OED describes it as U.S. and Cornwall.


barnstorm (v.)

1815, in reference to a theatrical troupe's performances in upstate New York barns (usually
featuring short action pieces to suit vulgar tastes); extended 1896 to electioneering, 1928 to
itinerant airplane pilots who performed stunts at fairs and races. Related: Barnstormed;
barnstorming.


