vulnerable (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin vulnerabilis wounding, from Latin vulnerare to wound, hurt, injure, maim,
from vulnus (genitive vulneris) wound, perhaps related to vellere pluck, to tear (see svelte), or
from PIE *wele-nes-, from *wele- (2) to strike, wound (see Valhalla).


Achilles tendon

from Modern Latin tendo Achillis, first used by German surgeon Heister and so-called in reference to
the one vulnerable spot of the great Greek hero Achilles, whose mother held him by the heel when she
dipped him in the River Styx to render him invulnerable (though this story is not in Homer and not
found before 1c. C.E.). Earlier Achilles' sinew, from Modern Latin chorda Achillis, coined 1693 by
Dutch anatomist Philip Verheyden when dissecting his own amputated leg. Hence figurative use of heel
of Achillies for vulnerable spot (1810).


vulnerability (n.)

1767, noun from vulnerable (q.v.).


underbelly (n.)

c.1600, from under + belly (n.). In figurative sense of most vulnerable part it is recorded from
Churchill's 1942 speech. Sometimes used erroneously or euphemistically in sense of seamy or sordid
part of anything.


set-up (n.)

arrangement, 1890, from verbal phrase set up, attested from c.1200 as to make ready for use and from
1950 (in pugilism) as to bring (someone) to a vulnerable position; from set (v.) + up (adv.). The
verbal phrase also can mean to establish (early 15c.) and put drinks before customers (1880).


penetrable (adj.)

early 15c., penetrating, from Latin penetrabilis penetrable, vulnerable, from penetrare (see
penetrate). Meaning capable of being penetrated is attested from 1530s; figurative use by 1590s.
Related: Penetrability.


pregnable (adj.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English preignable, earlier prenable (early 15c.), from Old French
prenable assailable, vulnerable, from stem of prendre to take, grasp, seize, from Latin prehendere
to take hold of, to seize (see prehensile).


impregnable (adj.)

early 15c., imprenable impossible to capture, from Middle French imprenable invulnerable, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Old French prenable assailable, vulnerable
(see pregnable). With intrusive -g- 16c., on model of deign, reign, etc. Related: Impregnability.


invulnerable (adj.)

1590s, from Latin invulnerabilis invulnerable, from in- not (see in- (1)) + vulnerabilis (see
vulnerable). Related: Invulnerably.


heel (n.1)

back of the foot, Old English hela, from Proto-Germanic *hanhilon (cognates: Old Norse h&aelig;ll,
Old Frisian hel, Dutch hiel), from PIE *kenk- (3) heel, bend of the knee (source also of Old English
hoh hock).    Meaning back of a shoe or boot is c.1400. Down at heels (1732) refers to heels of
boots or shoes worn down and the owner too poor to replace them. For Achilles' heel only vulnerable
spot see Achilles. To fight with (one's) heels (fighten with heles) in Middle English meant to run
away.


chaperon (n.)

1720, woman accompanying a younger, unmarried lady in public, from French chaperon protector,
especially female companion to a young woman, earlier head covering, hood (c.1400), from Old French
chaperon hood, cowl (12c.), diminutive of chape cape (see cap (n.)). ... English writers often
erroneously spell it chaperone, app. under the supposition that it requires a fem. termination
[OED]. The notion is of covering the socially vulnerable one.  May I ask what is a chaperon?    A
married lady; without whom no unmarried one can be seen in public. If the damsel be five and forty,
she cannot appear without the matron; and if the matron be fifteen, it will do.    [Catharine
Hutton, The Welsh Mountaineer, London, 1817]    The word had been used in Middle English in the
literal sense hooded cloak.


