vulture (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French vultur, Old French voutoir, voutre (Modern French vautour), from Latin
vultur, earlier voltur, perhaps related to vellere to pluck, to tear (see svelte). Figurative sense
is recorded from 1580s. Related: Vulturine; vulturous.


ossifrage (n.)

sea-eagle, osprey, c.1600, from Latin ossifraga vulture, fem. of ossifragus, literally bone-breaker,
from ossifragus (adj.) bone-breaking, from os (genitive ossis) bone (see osseous) + stem of frangere
to break (see fraction). By this name Pliny meant the lammergeier (from German, literally lamb-
vulture), a very large Old World vulture that swallows and digests bones and was believed also to
drop them from aloft to break them and get at the marrow. But in England and France, the word was
transferred to the osprey, perhaps on similarity of sound between the two words.


turkey-vulture (n.)

1823, from turkey + vulture. From 1670s as turkey-buzzard.


Vega (n.)

1638, bright northern star, the alpha of Lyra, from Arabic (Al Nasr) al Waqi translated variously as
the eagle of the desert or the falling vulture (or bird).


promethium (n.)

radioactive element, long one of the missing elements, 1948, so called by discoverers Jacob Marinsky
and Lawrence Glendenin, who detected it in 1945 in the fusion products of uranium while working on
the Manhattan Project. From Prometheus, who stole fire from the gods and was punished for it, +
element name ending -ium. The name not only symbolizes the dramatic way in which the element may be
produced in quantity as a result of man's harnessing of the energy of nuclear fission, but also
warns man of the impending danger of punishment by the vulture of war. [Marinsky and Glendenin]


gyrfalcon (n.)

also gerfalcon, c.1200, from Old French girfauc large northern falcon, probably from Frankish, from
Proto-Germanic *ger (source of Old High German gir vulture) + Latin falco hawk (see falcon). Folk
etymology connects it with Latin gyrus (see gyre) in reference to circling in the air.


Prometheus

demigod (son of the Titan Iapetus) who made man from clay and stole fire from heaven and taught
mankind its use, for which he was punished by Zeus by being chained to a rock in the Caucasus, where
a vulture came every day and preyed on his liver. The name is Greek, and anciently was interpreted
as literally forethinker, foreseer, from promethes thinking before, from pro- before (see pro-) +
*methos, related to mathein to learn, from enlargement of PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).
However Watkins suggests the second element is possibly from a base meaning to steal, also found in
Sanskrit mathnati he steals.


culture (n.)

mid-15c., the tilling of land, from Middle French culture and directly from Latin cultura a
cultivating, agriculture, figuratively care, culture, an honoring, from past participle stem of
colere tend, guard, cultivate, till (see colony). The figurative sense of cultivation through
education is first attested c.1500. Meaning the intellectual side of civilization is from 1805; that
of collective customs and achievements of a people is from 1867.    For without culture or holiness,
which are always the gift of a very few, a man may renounce wealth or any other external thing, but
he cannot renounce hatred, envy, jealousy, revenge. Culture is the sanctity of the intellect.
[William Butler Yeats]    Slang culture vulture is from 1947. Culture shock first recorded 1940.


stork (n.)

Old English storc stork, from Proto-Germanic *sturkaz (cognates: Old Norse storkr, Swedish and
Danish stork, Middle Dutch storc, Old High German storah, German Storch stork), from PIE *ster-
stiff (cognates: Old English stear stiff, strong; see stark). Perhaps so called with reference to
the bird's stiff or rigid posture. But some connect the word to Greek torgos vulture.    Old Church
Slavonic struku, Russian sterkhu, Lithuanian starkus, Hungarian eszterag, Albanian sterkjok stork
are said to be Germanic loan-words. The children's fable that babies are brought by storks (told by
adults who aren't ready to go into the details) is in English by 1854, from German and Dutch nursery
stories, no doubt from the notion that storks nesting on one's roof meant good luck, often in the
form of family happiness.


