vulva (n.)

late 14c., from Latin vulva, earlier volva womb, female sexual organ, perhaps literally wrapper,
from volvere to turn, twist, roll, revolve, also turn over in the mind, from PIE root *wel- (3) to
turn, revolve, with derivatives referring to curved, enclosing objects (see volvox).


cunnilingus (n.)

1887, from Latin cunnus vulva (see cunt) + lingere to lick (see lick (v.)). The Latin properly would
mean one who licks a vulva, but it is used in English in reference to the action, not the actor. The
verb ought to be *cunnilingue.Cunnilingus was a very familiar manifestation in classical times; ...
it tends to be especially prevalent at all periods of high civilization. [Havelock Ellis, 1905]


yoni (n.)

1799, from Sanskrit, female sexual principle as an object of veneration, literally vulva, womb.


quim (n.)

slang for female genitalia, vulva, vagina, 1735, perhaps 1610s, of unknown origin. Coarse and
disparaging use for  females collectively is from 1935.


labia minora (n.)

inner folds of skin around the vulva, 1781, Modern Latin, literally lesser lips (see labia). The
singular is labium minus.


labia majora (n.)

the outer fold of skin around the vulva, 1813, Modern Latin, literally great lips (see labia). The
singular is labium majus.


snatch (n.)

c.1300, a trap, snare, from snatch (v.). Meaning a sudden grab is from 1570s; that of a small amount
is from 1590s. Sense in weight-lifting is from 1928. Vulgar slang sense of vulva is recorded from
1903; a much older venereal sense was sexual intercourse quickly performed (1580s).


slit (n.)

mid-13c., long cut or rent (in clothes), incision, from slit (v.). Slang sense of vulva is attested
from 1640s. Old English had slit (n.) with a sense of a rending, bite; backbiting.


fanny (n.)

buttocks, 1920, American English, from earlier British meaning vulva (1879), perhaps from the name
of John Cleland's heroine in the scandalous novel Fanny Hill or Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure
(1748). The fem. proper name is a diminutive of Frances. The genital sense is still the primary one
outside U.S., but is not current in American English, a difference which can have consequences when
U.S. TV programs and movies air in Britain.


labia (n.)

from Latin labia, plural of labium lip (see lip (n.)). Specifically of the folds on either side of
the vulva from 1630s (labia pudendi).


gash (n.)

1540s, from Middle English garce (early 13c.), from Old North French garser to scarify, cut, slash
(Old French *garse), apparently from Vulgar Latin *charassare, from Greek kharassein engrave, from
PIE *gher- to scrape, scratch (see character). Loss of -r- is characteristic (see ass (n.2)). Slang
use for vulva dates to mid-1700s.


dyke (n.)

1931, American English, perhaps a shortening of morphadike, dialectal garbling of hermaphrodite; but
bulldyker engage in lesbian activities is attested from 1921, and a source from 1896 lists dyke as
slang for the vulva.    [T]he word appears first in the long forms, bulldiker and bulldyking, both
used in the 1920s by American blacks. No African antecedents have been found for the term, however,
which leads to the possibility that this is basically just another backcountry, barnyard word,
perhaps a combination of BULL and DICK. [Rawson]


muff (n.)

warm covering for the hands, 1590s, from Dutch mof a muff, shortened from Middle Dutch moffel
mitten, muff, from Middle French moufle mitten, from Old French mofle thick glove, large mitten,
handcuffs (9c.), from Medieval Latin muffula a muff, of unknown origin. In 17c.-18c. also worn by
men. Meaning vulva and pubic hair is from 1690s; muff-diver one who performs cunnilingus is from
1935.


vagina (n.)

sexual passage of the female from the vulva to the uterus, 1680s, medical Latin, from specialized
use of Latin vagina sheath, scabbard, covering; sheath of an ear of grain, hull, husk (plural
vaginae), from PIE *wag-ina- (cognates: Lithuanian vo&#382;iu ro cover with a hollow thing), from
root *wag- to break, split, bite. Probably the ancient notion is of a sheath made from a split piece
of wood (see sheath). A modern medical word; the Latin word was not used in an anatomical sense in
classical times. Anthropological vagina dentata is attested from 1902.


box (n.1.)

Old English box a wooden container, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from
Greek pyxis boxwood box, from pyxos box tree, of uncertain origin. See OED entry for discussion.
German B&uuml;chse also is a Latin loan word.    Meaning compartment at a theater is from c.1600.
Meaning pigeon-hole at a post office is from 1832. Meaning television is from 1950. Slang meaning
vulva is attested 17c., according to Dictionary of American Slang; modern use seems to date from
c.World War II, perhaps originally Australian, on notion of box of tricks. Box office is 1786; in
the figurative sense of financial element of a performance it is first recorded 1904. Box lunch (n.)
attested from 1899. The box set, multiple-album, CD or cassette issue of the work of an artist is
attested by 1955.


pussy (n.2)

slang for female pudenda, 1879, but probably older; perhaps from Old Norse puss pocket, pouch
(compare Low German puse vulva), but perhaps instead from the cat word (see pussy (n.1)) on notion
of soft, warm, furry thing; compare French le chat, which also has a double meaning, feline and
genital. Earlier uses are difficult to distinguish from pussy (n.1), as in:The word pussie is now
used of a woman [Philip Stubbes, The Anatomie of Abuses, 1583]But the absence of pussy in Grose and
other early slang works argues against the vaginal sense being generally known before late 19c., as
does its frequent use as a term of endearment in mainstream literature, as in:What do you think,
pussy? said her father to Eva. [Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, 1852]Pussy-whipped first
attested 1956.


Ionian (adj.)

of Ionia, the districts of ancient Greece inhabited by the Ionians (including Attica and the north
coast of the Peloponnesus, but especially the coastal strip of Asia Minor, including the islands of
Samos and Chios). The name (which Herodotus credits to an ancestral Ion, son of Apollo and Creusa)
probably is pre-Greek, perhaps related to Sanskrit yoni womb, vulva, and a reference to goddess-
worshipping people.    Also used of the sea that lies between Italy and the northern Peloponnesus
(1630s). The musical Ionian mode (1844) corresponds to our basic major scale but was characterized
by the Greeks as soft and effeminate, as were the Ionians generally.  The Ionians delighted in
wanton dances and songs more than the rest of the Greeks ... and wanton gestures were proverbially
termed Ionic motions. [Thomas Robinson, Arch&aelig;ologica Gr&aelig;ca, 1807]


hole (n.)

Old English hol orifice, hollow place, cave, perforation, from Proto-Germanic *hul (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German hol, Middle Dutch hool, Old Norse holr, German hohl hollow,
Gothic us-hulon to hollow out), from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    As a
contemptuous word for small dingy lodging or abode it is attested from 1610s. Meaning a fix, scrape,
mess is from 1760. Obscene slang use for vulva is implied from mid-14c. Hole in the wall small and
unpretentious place is from 1822; to hole up first recorded 1875. To need (something) like a hole in
the head, applied to something useless or detrimental, first recorded 1944 in entertainment
publications, probably a translation of a Yiddish expression such as ich darf es vi a loch in kop.


volvox (n.)

genus of fresh-water algae, 1798, from Latin volvere to roll, from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn,
revolve, with derivatives referring to curved, enclosing objects (cognates: Sanskrit valate turns
round, ulvam womb, vulva; Lithuanian valtis twine, net, vilnis wave, apvalus round; Old Church
Slavonic valiti roll, welter, vl&#365;na wave; Greek eluo wind, wrap, helix spiral object, eilein to
turn, squeeze; Gothic walwjan to roll; Old English wealwian roll, weoloc whelk, spiral-shelled
mollusk; Old High German walzan to roll, waltz; Old Irish fulumain rolling; Welsh olwyn wheel). So
called from their motion.


sycophant (n.)

1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), informer, talebearer, slanderer, from Middle French sycophante and
directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantes false accuser, slanderer, literally one who
shows the fig, from sykon fig (see fig) + phainein to show (see phantasm). Showing the fig was a
vulgar gesture made by sticking the thumb between two fingers, a display which vaguely resembles a
fig, itself symbolic of a vagina (sykon also meant vulva). The modern accepted explanation is that
prominent politicians in ancient Greece held aloof from such inflammatory gestures, but privately
urged their followers to taunt their opponents. The sense of mean, servile flatterer is first
recorded in English 1570s.    The explanation, long current, that it orig. meant an informer against
the unlawful exportation of figs cannot be substantiated. [OED]


fig (n.)

early 13c., from Old French figue (12c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al figa, from Vulgar Latin *fica,
from Latin ficus fig tree, fig, which, with Greek sykon, Armenian t'uz is prob. fr. a common
Mediterranean source [Buck], possibly a Semitic one (compare Phoenician pagh half-ripe fig). A
reborrowing of a word that had been taken directly from Latin as Old English fic.    The insulting
sense of the word in Shakespeare, etc. (A fig for ...) is 1570s, in part from fig as small,
valueless thing, but also from Greek and Italian use of their versions of the word as slang for
vulva, apparently because of how a ripe fig looks when split open [Rawson, Weekley]. Giving the fig
(French faire la figue, Spanish dar la higa) was an indecent gesture of ancient provenance, made by
putting the thumb between two fingers or into the mouth, with the intended effect of the modern
gesture of flipping the bird (see bird (n.3)). Also compare sycophant. Use of fig leaf in figurative
sense of flimsy disguise (1550s) is from Gen. iii:7.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


