wade (v.)

Old English wadan to go forward, proceed, move, stride, advance (the modern sense perhaps
represented in oferwaden wade across), from Proto-Germanic *wadan (cognates: Old Norse va&eth;a,
Danish vade, Old Frisian wada, Dutch waden, Old High German watan, German waten to wade), from PIE
root *wadh- (2) to go, found only in Germanic and Latin (cognates: Latin vadere to go, vadum shoal,
ford, vadare to wade). Italian guado, French gu&eacute; ford are Germanic loan-words.
Specifically walk into or through water (or any substance which impedes the free motion of limbs)
c.1200. Originally a strong verb (past tense wod, past participle wad); weak since 16c. Figurative
sense of to go into (action, battle, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Related: Waded; wading.
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,  And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,    [Gray,
Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard]


waders (n.)

waterproof high boots, 1841, plural agent noun from wade.


Peking

former transliteration of what is now (in the pinyin system) called Beijing. In the Wade-Giles
system it was Peiping; this form Peking pre-dates Wade-Giles and was formed by the old British-run,
Hong Kong-based Chinese postal system.


pinyin (n.)

system of Romanized spelling for Chinese, 1963, from Chinese pinyin to spell, to combine sounds into
syllables, from pin put together + yin sound, tone. Adopted officially by the People's Republic of
China in 1958. Outside China gradually superseding the 19c. Wade-Giles system (Mao Tse-tung is Wade-
Giles, Mao Zedong is pinyin).


waddle (v.)

to walk with short steps, swaying from side to side; to walk as a duck does, 1590s, frequentative of
wade. Related: Waddled; waddling. The noun is recorded from 1690s.


vamoose (v.)

to decamp, be off, 1834, from Spanish vamos let us go, from Latin vadamus, first person plural
indicative of vadere to go, to walk, go hastily, from PIE root *wadh- (2) to go (cognates: Old
English wadan to go, Latin vadum ford; see wade (v.)).


China (n.)

Asian country name, 1550s, of uncertain origin, probably ultimately from Sanskrit Cina-s the Chinese
(earliest European usage is in Italian, by Marco Polo), perhaps from Qin dynasty, which ruled 3c.
B.C.E. Latinized as Sina, hence sinologist. The Chinese word for the country is Chung-kuo (Wade-
Giles), Zhongguo (Pinyin).


paddle (v.1)

to dabble, wade in water, 1520s, probably cognate with Low German paddeln tramp about, frequentative
of padjen to tramp, to run in short steps, from pad (v.). Related: Paddled; paddling. Meaning to
move in water by means of paddles is a different word (see paddle (v.3)).


slobber (v.)

c.1400, probably of imitative origin; compare Frisian slobberje to slurp, Middle Low German
slubberen slurp, Middle Dutch overslubberen wade through a ditch. Related: Slobbered; slobbering. As
noun from c.1400 as mud, slime, 1755 as saliva. Congreve has slabber (v.), from Middle Dutch
slabberen.


