wag (v.)

early 13c. (intransitive), waver, vacillate, lack steadfastness, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse vagga a cradle, Danish vugge rock a cradle, Old Swedish wagga fluctuate, rock a
cradle), and in part from Old English wagian move backwards and forwards; all from Proto-Germanic
*wag- (cognates: Old High German weggen, Gothic wagjan to wag), probably from PIE root *wegh- to
move about (see weigh).    Transitive meaning move (something) back and forth or up and down is from
c.1300; of dogs and their tails from mid-15c.: and whanne they [hounds] see the hure maystre they
wol make him cheere and wagge hur tayles upon him. [Edward, Duke of York, The Master of Game, 1456].
Related: Wagged; wagging. Wag-at-the-wall (1825) was an old name for a hanging clock with pendulum
and weights exposed.


wag (n.1)

person fond of making jokes, 1550s, perhaps a shortening of waghalter gallows bird, person destined
to swing in a noose or halter, applied humorously to mischievous children, from wag (v.) + halter.
Or possibly directly from wag (v.); compare wagger one who stirs up or agitates (late 14c.).


wag (n.2)

act of wagging, 1580s, from wag (v.).


wage (n.)

c.1300, a payment for services rendered, reward, just deserts; mid-14c., salary paid to a provider
of service, from Anglo-French and Old North French wage (Old French gage) pledge, pay, reward, from
Frankish *wadja- or another Germanic source (compare Old English wedd pledge, agreement, covenant,
Gothic wadi pledge), from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see wed (v.)).    Also from mid-14c., a pledge,
guarantee, surety (usually in plural), and (c.1400) a promise or pledge to meet in battle. The
payment for service sense by late 14c. extended to allotments of money paid at regular intervals for
continuous or repeated service. Traditionally in English wages were payment for manual or mechanical
labor and somewhat distinguished from salary or fee. Modern French cognate gages (plural) means
wages of a domestic, one of a range of French pay words distinguished by class, such as traitement
(university professor), paye, salaire (workman), solde (soldier), r&eacute;compense, prix. The Old
English word was lean, related to loan and representing the usual Germanic word (Gothic laun, Dutch
loon, German lohn). Wage-earner attested from 1871.


wage (v.)

c.1300, give (something) as surety, deposit as a pledge, from Old North French wagier to pledge (Old
French gagier, to pledge, guarantee, promise; bet, wager, pay, Modern French gager), from wage (see
wage (n.)). Meaning to carry on, engage in (of war, etc.) is attested from mid-15c., probably from
earlier sense of to offer as a gage of battle, agree to engage in combat (mid-14c.). Related: Waged;
waging.


wager (n.)

c.1300, wajour a promise, a vow, something pledged or sworn to; also a bet, a wager; stakes,
something laid down as a bet, from Anglo-French wageure, Old North French wagiere (Old French
gagiere, Modern French gageure) pledge, security, from wagier to pledge (see wage (n.)).


wager (v.)

c.1600 (intransitive); 1610s (transitive), from wager (n.). Related: Wagered; wagering.


waggish (adj.)

willing to make a fool of oneself, and fond of doing so to others, 1580s, from wag (n.) + -ish.
Related: Waggishly; waggishness.


waggle (v.)

late 15c. (implied in waggling), frequentative of wag (v.). Compare Dutch waggelen to waggle, Old
High German wagon to move, shake, German wackeln to totter. Transitive sense from 1590s. Related:
Waggled.


wagon (n.)

four-wheeled vehicle to carry heavy loads, late 15c., from Middle Dutch wagen, waghen, from Proto-
Germanic *wagnaz (cognates: Old English w&aelig;gn, Modern English wain, Old Saxon and Old High
German wagan, Old Norse vagn, Old Frisian wein, German Wagen), from PIE *wogh-no-, suffixed form of
root *wegh- to carry, to move (cognates: Sanskrit vahanam vessel, ship, Greek okhos, Latin
vehiculum, Old Church Slavonic voz&#365; carriage, chariot, Russian povozka, Lithuanian va &#382;is
a small sledge, Old Irish fen, Welsh gwain carriage, cart; see weigh).    In Dutch and German, the
general word for a wheel vehicle; English use is a result of contact through Flemish immigration,
Dutch trade, or the Continental wars. It has largely displaced the native cognate, wain. Spelling
preference varied randomly between -g- and -gg- from mid-18c., before American English settled on
the etymological wagon, while waggon remained common in Great Britain. Wagon-train is attested from
1810. Phrase on the wagon abstaining from alcohol is 1904, originally on the water cart.


wagtail (n.)

c.1500, kind of small bird that has its tail in continuous motion (late 12c. as a surname), earlier
wagstart (mid-15c.), from wag (v.) + tail (n.). From 18c. as a harlot, but this sense seems to be
implied much earlier:    If therefore thou make not thy mistress a goldfinch, thou mayst chance to
find her a wagtaile. [Lyly, Midas, 1592]


bandwagon (n.)

also band-wagon, 1855, American English, from band (n.2) + wagon, originally a large wagon used to
carry the band in a circus procession; as these also figured in celebrations of successful political
campaigns, being on the bandwagon came to represent attaching oneself to anything that looks likely
to succeed, a usage first attested 1899 in writings of Theodore Roosevelt.


dowager (n.)

1520s, from Middle French douagere widow with a dower literally pertaining to a dower, from douage
dower, from douer endow, from Latin dotare, from dos (genitive dotis) dowry (see dowry).


scalawag (n.)

also scallawag, disreputable fellow, 1848, American English, originally in trade union jargon, of
uncertain origin; perhaps an alteration (by influence of wag habitual joker) of Scottish scallag
farm servant, rustic, itself an alteration of Scalloway, one of the Shetland Islands, wit the
reference being to little Shetland ponies (An early recorded sense of scalawag was undersized or
worthless animal, 1854). In U.S. history, used from 1862 as a derogatory term for anti-Confederate
native white Southerners.


sewage (n.)

1818, from sew (v.) to drain, draw off water (late 15c., from sewer (n.1)) + -age.


swag (v.)

to move heavily or unsteadily, 1520s, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse sveggja
to swing, sway, from the same source as Old English swingan to swing (see swing (v.)). Related:
Swagged; swagging.


swag (n.)

1650s, a lurching or swaying, from swag (v.). Meaning ornamental festoon (1794) is said to be
probably a separate development from the verb (but see swage). Swag lamp attested from 1966.
Colloquial sense of promotional material (from recording companies, etc.) was in use by 2001; swag
was English criminal's slang for quantity of stolen property, loot from c.1839. This might be
related to earlier senses of round bag (c.1300) and big, blustering fellow (1580s), which may
represent separate borrowings from the Scandinavian source. The primary meaning was 'a bulging bag'
[Klein].


swage (v.)

to shape or bend by use of a tool, 1831, from swage (n.), also swedge, tool or die for bending cold
metal (1812), from French suage, according to Century Dictionary from suer to sweat. Uncertain
connection to swage ornamental moulding (late 14c.), from Old French souage (Modern French suage),
which, according to Klein, is from soue rope, from Vulgar Latin *soca, probably of Gaulish origin
(compare Breton sug cord).


swager (n.)

1881, agent noun from swage.


swagger (v.)

1580s, to strut in a defiant or insolent manner; earliest recorded usages are in Shakespeare
(Midsummer Night's Dream, 2 Henry IV, King Lear), probably a frequentative form of swag (v.) to
sway. Meaning to boast or brag is from 1590s. Related: Swaggered; swaggering. The noun is attested
from 1725.


swaggerer (n.)

1590s, agent noun from swagger (v.).


