wage (v.)

c.1300, give (something) as surety, deposit as a pledge, from Old North French wagier to pledge (Old
French gagier, to pledge, guarantee, promise; bet, wager, pay, Modern French gager), from wage (see
wage (n.)). Meaning to carry on, engage in (of war, etc.) is attested from mid-15c., probably from
earlier sense of to offer as a gage of battle, agree to engage in combat (mid-14c.). Related: Waged;
waging.


wage (n.)

c.1300, a payment for services rendered, reward, just deserts; mid-14c., salary paid to a provider
of service, from Anglo-French and Old North French wage (Old French gage) pledge, pay, reward, from
Frankish *wadja- or another Germanic source (compare Old English wedd pledge, agreement, covenant,
Gothic wadi pledge), from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see wed (v.)).    Also from mid-14c., a pledge,
guarantee, surety (usually in plural), and (c.1400) a promise or pledge to meet in battle. The
payment for service sense by late 14c. extended to allotments of money paid at regular intervals for
continuous or repeated service. Traditionally in English wages were payment for manual or mechanical
labor and somewhat distinguished from salary or fee. Modern French cognate gages (plural) means
wages of a domestic, one of a range of French pay words distinguished by class, such as traitement
(university professor), paye, salaire (workman), solde (soldier), r&eacute;compense, prix. The Old
English word was lean, related to loan and representing the usual Germanic word (Gothic laun, Dutch
loon, German lohn). Wage-earner attested from 1871.


wager (n.)

c.1300, wajour a promise, a vow, something pledged or sworn to; also a bet, a wager; stakes,
something laid down as a bet, from Anglo-French wageure, Old North French wagiere (Old French
gagiere, Modern French gageure) pledge, security, from wagier to pledge (see wage (n.)).


worker (n.)

mid-14c., laborer, toiler, performer, doer, agent noun from work (v.). As a type of bee, 1747. As
one employed for a wage, 1848. Old English had wyrcend worker, laborer.


polemicist (n.)

1859, American English formation parallel to polemist (1825), from Greek polemistes a warrior, from
polemizein to wage war, to make war.


proletariat (n.)

also proletariate, the lowest class, 1853, from French prol&eacute;tariat, from Latin proletarius
(see proletarian). In political economics, indigent wage-earners, from 1856. Leninist phrase
dictatorship of the proletariat attested from 1918.


polemicize (v.)

1953, from polemic + -ize. Related: Polemicized; polemicizing. Earlier was polemize (1828), from
Greek polemizein to make war, to wage war.


belligerent (adj.)

1570s, from Latin belligerantem (nominative belligerans), past participle of belligerare to wage
war, from bellum war (see bellicose) + gerere to bear, to carry (see gest). The noun meaning party
or nation at war is from 1811. Related: Belligerently.


gest (n.)

famous deed, exploit; story, romance, c.1300, from Old French geste action, exploit, romance,
history (of celebrated people or actions), from Latin gesta actions, exploits, deeds, achievements,
neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry on, wage, perform, of unknown origin.
See jest.


rebel (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French rebelle stubborn, obstinate, rebellious (12c.) and directly from Latin
rebellis insurgent, rebellious, from rebellare to rebel, revolt, from re- opposite, against, or
perhaps again (see re-) + bellare wage war, from bellum war.


warrior (n.)

c.1300, from Old North French werreier (Old French guerroieor) a warrior, soldier, combatant, one
who wages war, from werreier wage war, from werre (see war (n.)).


Bellatrix

bright star in the left shoulder of Orion, from Latin bellatrix a female warrior, frequently used as
an adjective, warlike, skilled in war, fem. of bellator to wage war, from bellum war (see
bellicose). The Latin name, from the Alfonsine Tables (mid-13c.), very loosely translates the Arabic
name for the star, Al Najid the conqueror.    In astrology it was the natal star of all destined to
great civil or military honors, and rendered women born under its influence lucky and loquacious; or
as old Thomas Hood said, Women born under this constellation shall have mighty tongues. [Allen]


mortgage (n.)

late 14c., morgage, conveyance of property as security for a loan or agreement, from Old French
morgage (13c.), mort gaige, literally dead pledge (replaced in modern Frech by hypoth&egrave;que),
from mort dead (see mortal (adj.)) + gage pledge (see wage (n.)). So called because the deal dies
either when the debt is paid or when payment fails. Old French mort is from Vulgar Latin *mortus
dead, from Latin mortuus, past participle of mori to die (see mortal (adj.)). The -t- restored in
English based on Latin.


jukebox (n.)

1937, jook organ, from jook joint roadhouse (1935), Black English slang, from juke, joog wicked,
disorderly, in Gullah (the creolized English of the coastlands of South Carolina, Georgia, and
northern Florida), probably from Wolof and Bambara dzug unsavory. Said to have originated in central
Florida (see A Note on Juke, Florida Review, vol. VII, no. 3, spring 1938). The spelling with a -u-
might represent a deliberate attempt to put distance between the word and its origins.    For a long
time the commercial juke trade resisted the name juke box and even tried to raise a big publicity
fund to wage a national campaign against it, but juke box turned out to be the biggest advertising
term that could ever have been invented for the commercial phonograph and spread to the ends of the
world during the war as American soldiers went abroad but remembered the juke boxes back home.
[Billboard, Sept. 15, 1945]


