wake-up (n.)

something that brings one to alertness or out of sleep, 1965, often in the 1960s in reference to a
shot of heroin in the morning. Phrase wake-up call is attested from 1968, originally a call one
received from the hotel desk in the morning. Verbal phrase wake up is from 1530s; earlier the adverb
was out (late 14c.)


wake (n.1)

track left by a moving ship, 1540s, perhaps from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch wake hole in the
ice, from Old Norse v&#246;k, vaka hole in the ice, from Proto-Germanic *wakwo. The sense perhaps
evolved via track made by a vessel through ice. Perhaps the English word is directly from
Scandinavian. Figurative use (such as in the wake of following close behind) is recorded from 1806.


wake (n.2)

state of wakefulness, Old English -wacu (in nihtwacu night watch), related to watch (n.); and partly
from Old Norse vaka vigil, eve before a feast, related to vaka be awake (cognates: Old High German
wahta watch, vigil, Middle Dutch wachten to watch, guard; see wake (v.)). Meaning a sitting up at
night with a corpse is attested from early 15c. (the verb in this sense is recorded from mid-13c.;
as a noun lichwake is from late 14c.). The custom largely survived as an Irish activity. Wakeman
(c.1200), which survives as a surname, was Middle English for watchman.


wakeful (adj.)

c.1400, diligent, from wake (n.2) + -ful. Related: Wakefully; wakefulness.


waken (v.)

to become awake, cease to sleep, Old English w&aelig;cnan, w&aelig;cnian to rise, awake; spring
from, come into being, from the same source as wake (v.). OED regards the ending as the -n- suffix
of inchoative verbs of state, but Barnhart rejects this and says it is simply -en (1). Figurative
sense was in Old English. Transitive sense of to rouse (someone or something) from sleep is recorded
from c.1200. Related: Wakened; wakening.


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


sun-wake (n.)

rays of the setting sun reflected on water, 1891, from sun (n.) + wake (n.). Sailors' tradition says
a narrow wake means good weather the following day and bad weather follows a broad wake.


vigil (n.)

c.1200, eve of a religious festival (an occasion for devotional watching or observance), from Anglo-
French and Old French vigile watch, guard; eve of a holy day (12c.), from Latin vigilia a watch,
watchfulness, from vigil watchful, awake, on the watch, alert, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or
active, be strong (cognates: Old English wacan to wake up, arise, wacian to be awake; Old High
German wahta watch, vigil; see wake (v.)). Meaning watch kept on a festival eve in English is from
late 14c.; general sense of occasion of keeping awake for some purpose is recorded from 1711.


woke

past tense of wake (v.).


awake (v.)

a merger of two Middle English verbs: 1. awaken, from Old English aw&aelig;cnan (earlier
onw&aelig;cnan; strong, past tense awoc, past participle awacen) to awake, arise, originate, from a
on + wacan to arise, become awake (see wake (v.)); and 2. awakien, from Old English awacian (weak,
past participle awacode) to awaken, revive; arise; originate, spring from, from a on (see a (2)) +
wacian to be awake, remain awake, watch (see watch (v.)).    Both originally were intransitive only;
the transitive sense being expressed by Middle English awecchen (from Old English aweccan) until
later Middle English. In Modern English, the tendency has been to restrict the strong past tense and
past participle (awoke, awoken) to the original intransitive sense and the weak inflection
(awakened) to the transitive, but this never has been complete (see wake (v.); also compare awaken).


doughface (n.)

contemptuous nickname in U.S. politics for Northern Democrats who worked in the interest of the
South before the Civil War; it was taken to mean man who allows himself to be moulded. The source is
an 1820 speech by John Randolph of Roanoke, in the wake of the Missouri Compromise.    Randolph,
mocking the northerners intimidated by the South, referred to a children's game in which the players
daubed their faces with dough and then looked in a mirror and scared themselves. [Daniel Walker
Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007]   Mask of dough is recorded from 1809, and the same image
Randolph used is attested in another context by 1833.


quark (n.)

1964, applied by U.S. physicist Murray Gell-Mann (b.1929), who said in correspondence with the
editors of the OED in 1978 that he took it from a word in James Joyce's Finnegans Wake (1939), but
also that the sound of the word was in his head before he encountered the printed form in Joyce.
German Quark curds, rubbish has been proposed as the ultimate inspiration [Barnhart; Gell-Mann's
parents were immigrants from Austria-Hungary]. George Zweig, Gell-Mann's co-proposer of the theory,
is said to have preferred the name ace for them.


watch (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ccan keep watch, be awake, from Proto-Germanic *wakjan, from PIE *weg- (2) to be
strong, lively; essentially the same word as Old English wacian be or remain awake (see wake (v.));
perhaps a Northumbrian form of it. Meaning be vigilant is from c.1200. That of to guard (someone or
some place), stand guard is late 14c. Sense of to observe, keep under observance is mid-15c.
Related: Watched; watching.


batch (n.)

Old English *b&aelig;cce something baked, from bacan bake (see bake (v.)). Batch is to bake as watch
(n.) is to wake and match (n.2) one of a pair is to make. Extended 1713 to any quantity produced at
one operation.


waft (v.)

c.1500, transitive, to move gently (through the air), probably from Middle Dutch or Middle Low
German, ultimately from wachten to guard (perhaps via notion of a ship that guards another as it
sails), related to waken rouse from sleep, from Proto-Germanic *waht- (see wake (n.1)). Possibly
influenced by northern dialect waff cause to move to and fro (1510s), a variant of wave.
Intransitive sense from 1560s. Related: Wafted; wafting.


sleeping (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from sleep (v.). Sleeping-pill is from 1660s; sleeping-bag is from
1850; sleeping sickness as a specific African tropical disease is first recorded 1875; sleeping has
been used since late 14c. for diseases marked by morbid conditions. Sleeping Beauty (1729) is
Perrault's La belle au bois dormant.    It is ill wakyng of a sleapyng dogge. [Heywood, 1562]   <hr
/>   It is nought good a slepyng hound to wake. [Chaucer, c.1385]


reveille (n.)

1640s, from French r&eacute;veillez-vous awaken! imperative plural of r&eacute;veiller to awaken, to
wake up, from Middle French re- again (see re-) + eveiller to rouse, from Vulgar Latin *exvigilare,
from Latin ex- out + vigilare be awake, keep watch (see vigil).


vigor (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, energy in an activity, from Anglo-French vigour, Old French vigor force,
strength (Modern French vigueur), from Latin vigorem (nominative vigor) liveliness, activity, force,
from vigere be lively, flourish, thrive, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or active (see wake
(v.)).


gnat (n.)

Old English gn&aelig;tt gnat, midge, mosquito, earlier gneat, used of various small, flying insects,
from Proto-Germanic *gnattaz (cognates: Low German gnatte, German Gnitze); perhaps literally biting
insect and related to gnaw.    The gnatte is a litil fflye, and hatte culex..he souke&thorn; blood
and ha&thorn; in his mou&thorn; a pipe, as hit were a pricke..And is a-countid a-mong volatiles..and
greue&thorn; slepinge men wi&thorn; noyse &amp; wi&thorn; bytinge and wake&thorn; hem of here reste.
[John of Trevisa, transl. of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


vegetable (adj.)

early 15c., capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous; also neither animal nor mineral, of the
plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant, from Old French vegetable living, fit to live, and
directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis growing, flourishing, from Late Latin vegetabilis
animating, enlivening, from Latin vegetare to enliven, from vegetus vigorous, enlivened, active,
sprightly, from vegere to be alive, active, to quicken, from PIE *weg- (2) be strong, lively, source
of watch (v.), vigor, velocity, and possibly witch (see wake (v.)). The meaning resembling that of a
vegetable, dull, uneventful; having life such as a plant has is attested from 1854 (see vegetable
(n.)).


awaken (v.)

Old English aw&aelig;cnan (intransitive), to spring into being, arise, originate, also, less often,
to wake up; earlier onw&aelig;cnan, from a- (1) on + w&aelig;cnan (see waken). Transitive meaning to
rouse from sleep is recorded from 1510s; figurative sense of to stir up, rouse to activity is from
c.1600.    Originally strong declension (past tense awoc, past participle awacen), already in Old
English it was confused with awake (v.) and a weak past tense aw&aelig;cnede (modern awakened)
emerged and has since become the accepted form, with awoke and awoken transferred to awake. Subtle
shades of distinction determine the use of awake or awaken in modern English. Related: Awakening.


beatnik (n.)

coined 1958 by San Francisco newspaper columnist Herb Caen during the heyday of -nik suffixes in the
wake of Sputnik. From Beat generation (1952), associated with beat (n.) in its meaning rhythm
(especially in jazz) as well as beat (past participle adjective) worn out, exhausted, but originator
Jack Kerouac (1922-1969) in 1958 connected it with beatitude.The origins of the word beat are
obscure, but the meaning is only too clear to most Americans. More than the feeling of weariness, it
implies the feeling of having been used, of being raw. It involves a sort of nakedness of the mind.
[New York Times Magazine, Oct. 2, 1952] <hr />   Beat is old carny slang. According to Beat Movement
legend (and it is a movement with a deep inventory of legend), Ginsberg and Kerouac picked it up
from a character named Herbert Huncke, a gay street hustler and drug addict from Chicago who began
hanging around Times Square in 1939 (and who introduced William Burroughs to heroin, an important
cultural moment). The term has nothing to do with music; it names the condition of being beaten
down, poor, exhausted, at the bottom of the world. [Louis Menand, New Yorker, Oct. 1, 2007]


wait (v.)

c.1200, to watch with hostile intent, lie in wait for, plot against, from Anglo-French and Old North
French waitier to watch (Old French gaitier defend, watch out, be on one's guard; lie in wait for;
Modern French guetter), from Frankish *wahton or another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *waht-
(cognates: Dutch wacht a watching, Old High German wahten, German wachten to watch, to guard; Old
High German wahhon to watch, be awake, Old English wacian to be awake; see wake (v.)). General sense
of remain in some place is from late 14c.; that of to see to it that something occurs is late 14c.
Meaning to stand by in attendance on is late 14c.; specific sense of serve as an attendant at a
table is from 1560s. Related: Waited; waiting.    To wait (something) out endure a period of waiting
is recorded from 1849. Waiting room is attested from 1680s. Waiting list is recorded from 1841; the
verb wait-list to put (someone) on a waiting list is recorded from 1960. Waiting game is recorded
from 1835, originally in horse-racing.    When speed, not stoutness, is the best of a horse, quite a
contrary system is practised. With such a horse, the jockey plays a waiting game; that is, he
carefully nurses him through the race, so as not to distress him by overpacing him; as the finish
approaches, he creeps up to his horses by degrees, but does not quit them to go in front till he
sees that the pace has made them safe, -- when he lets loose and wins. [James Christie Whyte,
History of the British Turf, London, 1840]


watch (n.)

Old English w&aelig;cce a watching, state of being or remaining awake, wakefulness; also act or
practice of refraining from sleep for devotional or penitential purposes; from w&aelig;ccan (see
watch (v.)). From c.1200 as one of the periods into which the night is divided, in reference to
ancient times translating Latin vigilia, Greek phylake, Hebrew ashmoreth.    The Hebrews divided the
night into three watches, the Greeks usually into four (sometimes five), the Romans (followed by the
Jews in New Testament times) into four. [OED]   <hr />   On &#254;is niht be&#240; fowuer niht
wecches: Biforen euen &#254;e bilimpe&#240; to children; Mid-niht &#240;e bilimpe&#240; to
frumberdligges; hanecrau &#254;e bilimpe&#240; &#254;owuene men; morgewile to alde men. [Trinity
Homilies, c.1200]     From mid-13c. as a shift of guard duty; an assignment as municipal watchman;
late 13c. as person or group obligated to patrol a town (especially at night) to keep order, etc.
Also in Middle English, the practice of remaining awake at night for purposes of debauchery and
dissipation; hence wacches of wodnesse late-night revels and debauchery. The alliterative
combination watch and ward preserves the old distinction of watch for night-time municipal patrols
and ward for guarding by day; in combination, they meant continuous vigilance.    Military sense of
military guard, sentinel is from late 14c. General sense of careful observation, watchfulness,
vigilance is from late 14c.; to keep watch is from late 14c. Meaning period of time in which a
division of a ship's crew remains on deck is from 1580s. The meaning small timepiece is from 1580s,
developing from that of a clock to wake up sleepers (mid-15c.).


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


