walking (adj.)

c.1400, present participle adjective from walk (v.). Walking sickness, one in which the sufferer is
able to get about and is not bed-ridden, is from 1846. Walking wounded is recorded from 1917.
Walking bass is attested from 1939 in jazz slang. Walking stick is recorded from 1570s; the insect
so called from 1760.


gait (n.)

c.1300, gate a going or walking, departure, journey, earlier way, road, path (c.1200), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse gata way, road, path), cognate with Old High German gazza
street, German Gasse, Gothic gatwo. Meaning manner of walking is from mid-15c. Modern spelling
developed before 1750, originally in Scottish. Related: Gaited.


walk (n.)

c.1200, a tossing, rolling; mid-13c., an act of walking, a going on foot; late 14c., a stroll, also
a path, a walkway; from walk (v.). The meaning broad path in a garden is from 1530s. Meaning
particular manner of walking is from 1650s. Meaning manner of action, way of living is from 1580s;
hence walk of life (1733). Meaning range or sphere of activity is from 1759. Sports sense of base on
balls is recorded from 1905; to win in a walk (1854) is from horse racing (see walk-over). As a type
of sponsored group trek as a fund-raising event, by 1971 (walk-a-thon is from 1963).


twitterpated (adj.)

1942, apparently first attested in the Walt Disney movie Bambi (there also was a song by that name
but it was not in the studio release of the film), a past participle adjective formed from twitter
in the tremulous excitement noun sense (1670s) + pate (n.2) head (compare flutterpated, 1894).
Thumper: Why are they acting that way?   Friend Owl: Why, don't you know? They're twitterpated.
Flower, Bambi, Thumper: Twitterpated?   Friend Owl: Yes. Nearly everybody gets twitterpated in the
springtime. For example: You're walking along, minding your own business. You're looking neither to
the left, nor to the right, when all of a sudden you run smack into a pretty face. Woo-woo! You
begin to get weak in the knees. Your head's in a whirl. And then you feel light as a feather, and
before you know it, you're walking on air. And then you know what? You're knocked for a loop, and
you completely lose your head!   Thumper: Gosh, that's awful.


Doctor Martens

type of heavy walking boots, 1977 (use claimed from 1965), trademark name taken out by Herbert Funck
and Klaus Martens of West Germany.


solvitur ambulando

an appeal to practical experience for a solution or proof, Latin, literally (the problem) is solved
by walking, originally in reference to the proof by Diogenes the Cynic of the possibility of motion.


mincing (adj.)

affectedly dainty, 1520s, probably originally in reference to speech, when words were clipped to
affect elegance; or in reference to walking with short steps; present participle adjective from
mince (v.).


halting (n.)

act of limping or walking lamely, early 14c., verbal noun from halt (v.). Related: Haltingly.


plod (v.)

1560s, of uncertain origin, perhaps imitative of the sound of walking heavily or slowly. Related:
Plodded; plodding.


goose step (n.)

1806, originally was a military drill to teach balance; to stand on each leg alternately and swing
the other back and forth (which, presumably, reminded someone of a goose's way of walking); in
reference to marching without bending the knees (as in Nazi military reviews) it apparently is first
recorded 1916. As a verb by 1854.


leg-work (n.)

1891, from leg (n.) + work (n.). Originally news reporter slang for an assignment that produced more
walking than text.


ingress (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin ingressus an advance; walking; an entry, from past participle stem of ingredi
to step into, enter (see ingredient). The verb, sometimes said to be American English, is attested
from early 14c.


walk (v.)

travel on foot, c.1200, a merger of two verbs, 1. Old English wealcan to toss, roll, move round
(past tense weolc, past participle wealcen), and 2. wealcian to roll up, curl, from Proto-Germanic
*welk- (cognates: Old Norse valka to drag about, Danish valke to full (cloth), Middle Dutch walken
to knead, press, full (cloth), Old High German walchan to knead, German walken to full), perhaps
ultimately from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, roll (see volvox).    The shift in sense is perhaps from
a colloquial use of the Old English word or via the sense of to full cloth (by treading on it),
though this sense does not appear until after the change in meaning. In 13c. it is used of snakes
and the passage of time, and in 15c. of wheeled carts. Rarely is there so specific a word as NE
walk, clearly distinguished from both go and run [Buck]. Meaning to go away is recorded from mid-
15c. Transitive meaning to exercise a dog (or horse) is from late 15c.; meaning to escort (someone)
in a walk is from 1620s. Meaning move (a heavy object) by turning and shoving it in a manner
suggesting walking is by 1890. To walk it off, of an injury, etc., is from 1741. Related: Walked;
walking.


walk-through (n.)

also walkthrough, 1944, an easy part (in a theatrical production), from walk (v.) + through. Meaning
dry run, full rehearsal is from 1959, from the notion of walking (someone) through something.


cane (v.)

to beat with a walking stick, 1660s, from cane (n.). Related: Caned; caning.


gradient (n.)

steep slope of a road or railroad, 1835, principally in American English, from grade (n.) by analogy
of quotient, etc. It was used 17c. as an adjective, of animals, characterized by walking; in that
case probably from Latin gradientem, present participle of gradi to walk.


splosh (v.)

1889 [in Farmer, who calls it A New England variant of splash], ultimately imitative. Perhaps
influenced by splish-splosh sound made by feet walking through wet (1881). Related: Sploshed;
sploshing.


moonwalk (n.)

a walking on the moon, 1966, from moon (n.) + walk (n.).


pump (n.2)

low shoe without fasteners, 1550s, of unknown origin, perhaps echoic of the sound made when walking
in them, or perhaps from Dutch pampoesje, from Javanese pampoes, of Arabic origin. Klein's sources
propose a connection with pomp (n.). Related: pumps.


trifid (adj.)

divided into three lobes, 1620s, from Latin trifidus cleft in three, from tri- three (see tri-) +
-fid. This adjective probably inspired triffid, the name of the three-legged walking poisonous
plants in John Wyndham's novel The Day of the Triffids (1951).


stoa (n.)

portico, c.1600, from Greek stoa colonnade, corridor, from PIE *sta- to stand (see stet). A name
given in Athens to several public buildings. The ancient stoa was usually a detached portico, often
of considerable extent, generally near a public place to afford opportunity for walking or
conversation under shelter [Century Dictionary].


ambulatory (adj.)

pertaining to walking; also shifting, not permanent, 1620s, from Latin ambulatorius of or pertaining
to a walker; movable, from ambulator, agent noun from past participle stem of ambulare to walk (see
amble). Middle English had ambulary movable (mid-15c.).


cakewalk (n.)

1863, American English, from cake (n.) + walk (n.), probably in reference to the cake given as a
prize for the fanciest steps in a procession in a Southern black custom (explained by Thornton,
1912, as, A walking competition among negroes, in which the prize cake goes to the couple who put on
most style). Its figurative meaning of something easy (1863) is recorded before the literal one
(1879). As a verb, from 1909. This may also be the source of the phrase to take the cake (1847).


gyromancy (n.)

1550s, method of divination by walking in a circle till the person falls down from dizziness, the
inference being drawn from the place in the circle at which he fell, from Medieval Latin gyromantia,
from Greek gyyros circle (see gyre) + manteia divination, oracle (see -mancy).


bacteria (n.)

1847, plural of Modern Latin bacterium, from Greek bakterion small staff, diminutive of baktron
stick, rod, from PIE *bak- staff used for support (also source of Latin baculum rod, walking stick).
So called because the first ones observed were rod-shaped. Introduced as a scientific word 1838 by
German naturalist Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg (1795-1876).


flip-flop (n.)

also flip flop, thong sandal, by 1972, imitative of the sound of walking in them (flip-flap had been
used in various echoic senses, mostly echoic, since 1520s); sense of complete reversal of direction
dates from 1900.   Flip-flaps, a peculiar rollicking dance indulged in by costermongers, better
described as the double shuffle; originally a kind of somersault. [Hotten's Slang Dictionary, 1864]


talipes (n.)

club-foot, deformed foot, from Latin talus ankle (see talus (n.1)) + pes foot (see foot (n.)). The
notion seems to be walking on the ankles.


preamble (n.)

late 14c., from Old French preambule (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin preambulum, neuter
adjective used as a noun, properly preliminary, from Late Latin praeambulus walking before, from
Latin prae- before (see pre-) + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).


plantigrade (adj.)

1831, from French plantigrade walking on the sole of the foot (1795), from Latin planta sole of the
foot (see plant (n.)) + gradus step (see grade (n.)).


progress (n.)

late 14c., a going on, action of walking forward, from Old French progres (Modern French
progr&#232;s), from Latin progressus a going forward, from past participle of progredi (see
progression).    In early use in English especially a state journey by royalty. Figurative sense of
growth, development, advancement to higher stages is from c.1600. To be in progress underway is
attested by 1849. Progress report attested by 1865.


peripatetic (n.)

c.1400, disciple of Aristotle, from Old French perypatetique (14c.), from Latin peripateticus
pertaining to the disciples or philosophy of Aristotle, from Greek peripatetikos given to walking
about (especially while teaching), from peripatein walk up and down, walk about, from peri- around
(see peri-) + patein to walk, tread (see find (v.)). Aristotle's custom was to teach while strolling
through the Lyceum in Athens. In English, the philosophical meaning is older than that of person who
wanders about (1610s).


allure (v.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French alurer, Old French aleurer to attract, captivate; train a falcon to hunt,
from &agrave; to (see ad-) + loirre falconer's lure, from a Frankish word (see lure), perhaps
influenced by French allure gait, way of walking. Related: Allured; alluring. The noun is first
attested 1540s; properly this sense is allurement.


cane (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cane reed, cane, spear (13c., Modern French canne), from Latin canna
reed, cane, from Greek kanna, perhaps from Assyrian qanu tube, reed (compare Hebrew qaneh, Arabic
qanah reed), from Sumerian gin reed. But Tucker finds this borrowing needless and proposes a native
Indo-European formation from a root meaning to bind, bend.  Sense of walking stick in English is
1580s.


baton (n.)

1540s, a staff used as a weapon, from French b&acirc;ton stick, walking stick, staff, club, wand,
from Old French baston (12c.) stick, staff, rod, from Late Latin bastum stout staff, probably of
Gaulish origin or else from Greek *baston support, from bastazein to lift up, raise, carry. Meaning
staff carried as a symbol of office is from 1580s; musical sense of conductor's wand is from 1841
(from 1839 as a French word in English). Often anglicized 17c.-18c. as batoon.


promenade (n.)

1560s, leisurely walk, from Middle French promenade (16c.), from se promener go for a walk, from
Late Latin prominare to drive (animals) onward, from pro- forth (see pro-) + minare to drive
(animals) with shouts, from minari to threaten (see menace (n.)).    Meaning place for walking is
1640s; specifically walkway by the sea late 18c.; British sense of music hall favored by 'loose
women and the simpletons who run after them' is attested from 1863. Sense of dance given by a school
is from 1887.


cede (v.)

1630s, from French c&#233;der or directly from Latin cedere to yield, give place; to give up some
right or property, originally to go from, proceed, leave, from Proto-Italic *kesd-o- to go away,
avoid, from PIE root *sed- (2) to go, yield (cognates: Sanskrit sedhati to drive; chase away;
Avestan apa-had- turn aside, step aside; Greek hodos way, hodites wanderer, wayfarer; Old Church
Slavonic chodu a walking, going, choditi to go). Related: Ceded; ceding. The sense evolution in
Latin is via the notion of to go away, withdraw, give ground.


somnambulism (n.)

1786, walking in one's sleep or under hypnosis, from French somnambulisme, from Modern Latin
somnambulus sleepwalker, from Latin somnus sleep (see Somnus) + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).
Originally brought into use during the excitement over animal magnetism; it won out over
noctambulation. A stack of related words came into use early 19c., such as somnambule sleepwalker
(1837, from French somnambule, 1690s), earlier somnambulator (1803); as adjectives, somnambulary
(1827), somnambular (1820).


terrace (n.)

1510s, gallery, portico, balcony, later flat, raised place for walking (1570s), from Middle French
terrace (Modern French terasse), from Old French terrasse (12c.) platform (built on or supported by
a mound of earth), from Vulgar Latin *terracea, fem. of *terraceus earthen, earthy, from Latin terra
earth, land (see terrain). As a natural formation in geology, attested from 1670s. In street names,
originally in reference to a row of houses along the top of a slope, but lately applied arbitrarily
as a fancy name for an ordinary road. As a verb from 1610s, to form into a terrace. Related:
Terraced.


stilt (n.)

early 14c., a crutch, a common Germanic word (cognates: Danish stylte, Swedish stylta, Middle Low
German, Middle Dutch stelte stilt, Old High German stelza plow handle, crutch), though the exact
relationship of them all is unclear, from Proto-Germanic *steltijon, from PIE root *stel- to put,
stand (see stall (n.1)). Application to wooden poles for walking across marshy ground, etc. is from
mid-15c. Meaning one of the posts on which a building is raised from the ground is first attested
1690s. As a type of bird with long legs, from 1831. Stilted in the figurative sense of pompous,
stuffy is first recorded 1820.


ladder (n.)

Old English hl&aelig;der ladder, steps, from Proto-Germanic *khlaidri (cognates: Old Frisian
hledere, Middle Dutch ledere, Old High German leitara, German Leiter), from PIE root *klei- to lean
(cognates: Greek klimax ladder; see lean (v.)). In late Old English, rungs were
l&aelig;ddrest&aelig;f&aelig; and the side pieces were ledder steles. The belief that walking under
one brings bad luck is attested from 1787, but its origin likely is more pragmatic than symbolic.
Ladder-back (adj.) as a type of chair is from 1898.


pace (n.)

late 13c., a step in walking; rate of motion, from Old French pas a step, pace, trace, and directly
from Latin passus, passum a step, pace, stride, noun use of past participle of pandere to stretch
(the leg), spread out, probably from PIE *pat-no-, a nasalized variant of root *pete- to spread
(cognates: Greek petannynai to spread out, petalon a leaf, patane plate, dish; Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old English f&aelig;&eth;m embrace, bosom, fathom, Old Saxon fathmos the
outstretched arms). Also, a measure of five feet [Johnson]. Pace-setter in fashion is from 1895.


stride (n.)

a step in walking, especially a long one, from Old English stride a stride, a step, from the root of
stride (v.). Compare Dutch strijd, Old High German strit, German Streit fight, contention, combat,
Swedish and Danish strid combat, contention. From c.1300 as a measure of distance roughly the length
of a stride. Figurative meaning advance rapidly, make progress is from c.1600. Of animals
(especially horses) from early 17c. To take (something) in stride (1832), i.e. without change of
gait, originally is of horses leaping hedges in the hunting-field; figurative sense attested from
1902. To hit (one's) stride is from horse-racing. Jazz music stride tempo is attested from 1938.
Meaning a standing with the legs apart, a straddle is from 1590s.


cum

verb and noun, by 1973, apparently a variant of the sexual sense of come that originated in
pornographic writing, perhaps first in the noun sense. This experience sexual orgasm slang meaning
of come (perhaps originally come off) is attested from 1650, in Walking In A Meadowe Greene, in a
folio of loose songs collected by Bishop Percy.    They lay soe close together, they made me much to
wonder;  I knew not which was wether, until I saw her under.  Then off he came, and blusht for shame
soe soon that he had endit;  Yet still she lies, and to him cryes, one more and none can mend it.
As a noun meaning semen or other product of orgasm it is on record from the 1920s. The sexual cum
seems to have no connection with Latin cum, the preposition meaning with, together with, which is
occasionally used in English in local names of combined parishes or benifices (such as Chorlton-cum-
Hardy), in popular Latin phrases (such as cum laude), or as a combining word to indicate a dual
nature or function (such as slumber party-cum-bloodbath).


square (adj.)

early 14c., containing four equal sides and right angles, from square (n.), or from Old French
esquarre, past participle of esquarrer. Meaning honest, fair, is first attested 1560s; that of
straight, direct is from 1804. Of meals, from 1868.    Sense of old-fashioned is 1944, U.S. jazz
slang, said to be from shape of a conductor's hand gestures in a regular four-beat rhythm. Square-
toes meant nearly the same thing late 18c.: precise, formal, old-fashioned person, from the style of
men's shoes worn early 18c. and then fallen from fashion. Squaresville is attested from 1956. Square
dance attested by 1831; originally one in which the couples faced inward from four sides; later of
country dances generally.    [T]he old square dance is an abortive attempt at conversation while
engaged in walking certain mathematical figures over a limited area. [March 1868]


ambulance (n.)

1798, mobile or field hospital, from French (h&ocirc;pital) ambulant, literally walking (hospital),
from Latin ambulantem (nominative ambulans), present participle of ambulare to walk (see amble).
AMBULANCE, s. f. a moveable hospital. These were houses constructed in a manner so as to be taken to
pieces, and carried from place to place, according to the movements of the army; and served as
receptacles in which the sick and wounded men might be received and attended. [Lexicographica-
Neologica Gallica (The Neological French Dictionary), William Dupr&#233;, London, 1801]    The word
was not common in English until the meaning transferred from field hospital to vehicle for conveying
wounded from field (1854) during the Crimean War. In late 19c. U.S. the word was used dialectally to
mean prairie wagon. Ambulance-chaser as a contemptuous term for a type of lawyer dates from 1897.


sleep (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;p sleep, sleepiness, inactivity, from Proto-Germanic *slepaz, from the root of
sleep (v.); compare cognate Old Saxon slap, Old Frisian slep, Middle Dutch sl&aelig;p, Dutch slaap,
Old High German slaf, German Schlaf, Gothic sleps.    Personified in English from late 14c., on
model of Latin Somnus), Greek Hypnos. Figurative use for repose of death was in Old English; to put
(an animal) to sleep kill painlessly is recorded from 1923 (a similar imagery is in cemetery). Sleep
deprivation attested from 1906. Sleep-walker somnambulist is attested from 1747; sleep-walking is
from 1840. To be able to do something in (one's) sleep easily is recorded from 1953.


luck (n.)

late 15c. from early Middle Dutch luc, shortening of gheluc happiness, good fortune, of unknown
origin. It has cognates in Dutch geluk, Middle High German g(e)l&uuml;cke, German Gl&uuml;ck
fortune, good luck. Perhaps first borrowed in English as a gambling term. To be down on (one's) luck
is from 1832; to be in luck is from 1900; to push (one's) luck is from 1911. Good luck as a
salutation to one setting off to do something is from 1805. Expression better luck next time
attested from 1802.    A gentleman was lately walking through St Giles's, where a levelling citizen
attempting to pick his pocket of a handkerchief, which the gentleman caught in time, and secured,
observing to the fellow, that he had missed his aim, the latter, with perfect sang-froid, answered,
better luck next time master.Â  [â&euro;&oelig;Monthly Mirror,â&euro;? London, 1802]


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


stride (v.)

Old English stridan (past tense strad, past participle striden), to straddle, mount (a horse), from
Proto-Germanic *stridanan (cognates: Middle Low German strede stride, strive; Old Saxon stridian,
Danish stride, Swedish strida to fight, Dutch stridjen, Old High German stritan, German etreiten to
fight, contend, struggle, Old Norse stri&eth;r strong, hard, stubborn, severe).    The sense
connection in the various Germanic forms is perhaps strive, make a strong effort; the senses having
to do with walking and standing are found only in English and Low German. Meaning to walk with long
or extended steps is from c.1200. Cognate words in most Germanic languages mean to fight, struggle;
the notion behind the English usage might be the effort involved in making long strides, striving
forward.


vampire (n.)

spectral being in a human body who maintains semblance of life by leaving the grave at night to suck
the warm blood of the living as they sleep, 1734, from French vampire (18c.) or German Vampir (1732,
in an account of Hungarian vampires), from Hungarian vampir, from Old Church Slavonic opiri
(cognates: Serbian vampir, Bulgarian vapir, Ukrainian uper), said by Slavic linguist Franc
Miklo&#353;i&#269; to be ultimtely from Kazan Tatar ubyr witch, but Max Vasmer, an expert in this
linguistic area, finds that phonetically doubtful. An Eastern European creature popularized in
English by late 19c. gothic novels, however there are scattered English accounts of night-walking,
blood-gorged, plague-spreading undead corpses from as far back as 1196. Figurative sense of person
who preys on others is from 1741. Applied 1774 by French biologist Buffon to a species of South
American blood-sucking bat. Related: Vampiric.


