wan (adj.)

Old English wann dark, dusky, lacking luster, later leaden, pale, gray, of uncertain origin, and not
found in other Germanic languages. The connecting notion is colorlessness. Perhaps related to wane.
Related: Wanly; wanness.


wand (n.)

c.1200, from Old Norse vondr rod, switch (cognate with Gothic wandus rod, Middle Swedish vander),
from Proto-Germanic *wend- to turn, see wind (v.)). The notion is of a bending, flexible stick.
Compare cognate Old Norse veggr, Old English wag wall, Old Saxon, Dutch wand, Old High German want,
German Wand wall, originally wickerwork for making walls, or wall made of wattle-work (an insight
into early Germanic domestic architecture). Magic wand is attested from c.1400 and shows the
etymological sense of suppleness already had been lost.


wander (v.)

Old English wandrian move about aimlessly, wander, from West Germanic *wandran to roam about
(cognates: Old Frisian wondria, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wanderen, German wandern to wander,
a variant form of the root represented in Old High German wantalon to walk, wander), from PIE root
*wendh- to turn, wind, weave (see wind (v.1)). In reference to the mind, affections, etc., attested
from c.1400. Related: Wandered; wandering. The Wandering Jew of Christian legend first mentioned
13c. (compare French le juif errant, German der ewige Jude).


wanderlust (n.)

1902, from German Wanderlust, literally desire for wandering (see wander + lust).


wane (v.)

Old English wanian make or become smaller gradually, diminish, decline, fade, from Proto-Germanic
*wanen (cognates: Old Saxon wanon, Old Norse vana, Old Frisian wania, Middle Dutch waenen, Old High
German wanon to wane, to grow less), from *wano- lacking, from PIE *we-no-, from root *eue- to
leave, abandon, give out (see vain). Related: Waned; waning; wanes.


wang (n.)

penis, 1933, slang, probably from whangdoodle, an earlier term for gadget, thing for which the
correct name is not known. Many such words (thingy, dingus, etc.) have been used in slang for penis,
not because the actual name was unknown, but because it was unmentionable. Another possibility is
that the slang word is a variant of whang large, thick slice (1630s), which earlier was used in the
sense of thong (1530s) and is itself a variant of thwang, an alternative form of thong (see thong).
In Old English, wang meant cheek, jaw, hence wangto&#240; cheek-tooth, molar.


wangle (v.)

obtain something by trickery, 1888, originally British printer's slang for fake by manipulation;
perhaps an alteration of waggle, or of wankle (now dialectal) unsteady, fickle, from Old English
wancol (see wench (n.)). Brought into wider use by World War I soldiers.


waning (adj.)

Old English wanunge, wonunge, present participle of wanian (see wane).


wank (n.)

act of (male) masturbation, 1948, slang. As a verb, from 1950. Related: Wanked; wanking.


Wankel (n.)

type of rotary internal combustion engine, 1961, from name of German engineer Felix Wankel
(1902-1988).


wanker (n.)

1940s, masturbator, British slang, from wank to masturbate, of unknown origin. General sense of
contemptible person is attested from 1972. Compare sense evolution of jerk (n.).


wanna (v.)

representing the casual pronunciation of want to, by 1896.


wannabe (n.)

1981, originally American English surfer slang, from casual pronunciation of want to be; popularized
c.1984 in reference to female fans of pop singer Madonna.


want (v.)

c.1200, to be lacking, from Old Norse vanta to lack, want, earlier *wanaton, from Proto-Germanic
*wanen, from PIE *we-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (see vain). The meaning
desire, wish for, feel the need of is recorded by 1706.


want (n.)

c.1200, deficiency, insufficiency, shortage, from want (v.) and from Old Norse vant, neuter of vanr
wanting, deficient; related to Old English wanian to diminish (see wane). Meaning state of
destitution, poverty is recorded from early 14c. Meaning thing desired, that which is lacking but
needed is from 1560s. Phrase for want of is recorded from c.1400. Newspaper want ad is recorded from
1897. Middle English had wantsum (c.1200) in want, deprived of, literally want-some.


wanted (adj.)

1690s, lacking; 1812, sought by the police; past participle adjective from want (v.). Wanted poster
attested by 1945.


wanting (adj.)

early 14c., wantand, deficient, lacking, present participle adjective from want (v.). Modern
spelling from 16c.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


wanton (n.)

one who is ill-behaved, mid-15c., especially lascivious, lewd person (1520s), from wanton (adj.).


wanton (v.)

to revel, frolic unrestrainedly, 1580s, from wanton (adj.). Related: Wantoned; wantoning.


allowance (n.)

late 14c., praise (a sense now obsolete), from Old French aloance allowance, granting, allocation,
from alouer (see allow). Sense of a sum alloted to meet expenses is from c.1400. In accounts,
meaning a sum placed to one's credit is attested from 1520s. To make allowances is literally to add
or deduct a sum from someone's account for some special circumstance. Figurative use of the phrase
is attested from 1670s.


bwana

respectful or reverential form of address in East Africa, 1878, from Swahili.


Gondwana

name of a region in north central India, from Sanskrit gondavana, from vana forest + Gonda, name of
a Dravidian people, literally fleshy navel, outie belly-button. The name was extended by geologists
to a series of sedimentary rocks found there (1873), then to identical rocks in other places; the
fossils found in this series were used by geologists to reconstruct the ancient southern
supercontinent, which therefore was called Gondwanaland (1896), from German, where it was coined by
German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914) in 1885.


Kiwanis

businessmen's and professionals' society, formed in Detroit, Michigan, U.S., in 1915, the name is of
obscure meaning.


rowan (n.)

mountain ash, 1804, from rowan-tree, rountree (1540s), northern English and Scottish, from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse reynir, Swedish Ronn the rowan), ultimately from the root of
red, in reference to the berries.    There were those in this neighbourhood, long after the
beginning of the present century, who believed that a slip of rowan tree carried on their person
dispelled glamour, and rendered nugatory all the powers of sorcery and witchcraft. [Alexander Laing,
Lindores Abbey and the Burgh of Newburgh, Edinburgh, 1876]


Rwanda

African nation, named for indigenous people there, whose word for themselves is of unknown origin.


Saskatchewan

Canadian province, named for the river running through it, from Cree kis-si-ska-tches-wani-sipi
rapid flowing river.


swan (n.)

Old English swan swan, from Proto-Germanic *swanaz singer (cognates: Old Saxon swan, Old Norse
svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, Old High German swan, German
Schwan), probably literally the singing bird, from PIE root *swen- to sing, make sound (see sound
(n.1)); thus related to Old English geswin melody, song and swinsian to make melody.    In classical
mythology, sacred to Apollo and to Venus. The singing of swans before death was alluded to by
Chaucer (late 14c.), but swan-song (1831) is a translation of German Schwanengesang. The ancient
Indo-European mythical swan-maiden so called by mythographers from 1829. Swan dive is recorded from
1898. A black swan was proverbial for something extremely rare or non-existent (late 14c.), after
Juvenal [Sat. vi. 164], but later they turned up in Australia (Chenopsis atratus).    Do you say no
worthy wife is to be found among all these crowds? Well, let her be handsome, charming, rich and
fertile; let her have ancient ancestors ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the
dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war--a prodigy as rare upon the earth as a black swan!
yet who could endure a wife that possessed all perfections?  I would rather have a Venusian wench
for my wife than you, O Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, if, with all your virtues, you bring me a
haughty brow, and reckon up Triumphs as part of your marriage portion. [Juvenal]


Swanee

in Stephen Foster's Old Folks at Home, river in Georgia and Florida, usually Suwanee, sometimes said
to be a corruption of Spanish San Juan [Room]; Bright says the river name is from the Cherokee
village of Sawani, for which no etymology is offered.


swang

obsolete past tense of swing (v.).


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


swanky (adj.)

imposing, stylish, 1842, from swank + -y (2). Related: swankiness.


Swansea

a Scandinavian name, probably literally Sveinn's Island.


Szechwan

also Szechuan, place name, said to mean four rivers, from Chinese si four + chuan river.


Taiwan

literally terrace bay, from Chinese tai terrace + wan bay. Related: Taiwanese.


twang (n.)

1550s, of imitative origin. Originally the sound of plucked bows and strings; extension to a nasal
vocal sound is first recorded 1660s. The verb is first attested 1540s. Related: Twanged; twanging.


twangy (adj.)

1858, from twang (n.) + -y (2). Related: Twangily; twanginess.


unwanted (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + past participle of want (v.).


