wane (v.)

Old English wanian make or become smaller gradually, diminish, decline, fade, from Proto-Germanic
*wanen (cognates: Old Saxon wanon, Old Norse vana, Old Frisian wania, Middle Dutch waenen, Old High
German wanon to wane, to grow less), from *wano- lacking, from PIE *we-no-, from root *eue- to
leave, abandon, give out (see vain). Related: Waned; waning; wanes.


wan (adj.)

Old English wann dark, dusky, lacking luster, later leaden, pale, gray, of uncertain origin, and not
found in other Germanic languages. The connecting notion is colorlessness. Perhaps related to wane.
Related: Wanly; wanness.


waning (adj.)

Old English wanunge, wonunge, present participle of wanian (see wane).


want (n.)

c.1200, deficiency, insufficiency, shortage, from want (v.) and from Old Norse vant, neuter of vanr
wanting, deficient; related to Old English wanian to diminish (see wane). Meaning state of
destitution, poverty is recorded from early 14c. Meaning thing desired, that which is lacking but
needed is from 1560s. Phrase for want of is recorded from c.1400. Newspaper want ad is recorded from
1897. Middle English had wantsum (c.1200) in want, deprived of, literally want-some.


honeymoon (n.)

1540s, hony moone, but probably much older, indefinite period of tenderness and pleasure experienced
by a newly wed couple, from honey (n.) in reference to the new marriage's sweetness, and moon (n.)
in reference to how long it would probably last, or from the changing aspect of the moon: no sooner
full than it begins to wane. French has cognate lune de miel, but German version is flitterwochen
(plural), from flitter tinsel + wochen week. In figurative use from 1570s. Specific sense of post-
wedding holiday attested from c.1800; as a verb in this sense from 1821. Related: Honeymooned;
honeymooning.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


