wanton (n.)

one who is ill-behaved, mid-15c., especially lascivious, lewd person (1520s), from wanton (adj.).


wanton (v.)

to revel, frolic unrestrainedly, 1580s, from wanton (adj.). Related: Wantoned; wantoning.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


ribald (adj.)

c.1500, from ribald, ribaud (n.), mid-13c., a rogue, ruffian, rascall, scoundrell, varlet, filthie
fellow [Cotgrave], from Old French ribaut, ribalt rogue, scoundrel, lewd lover, also as an
adjective, wanton, depraved, dissolute, licentious, of uncertain origin, perhaps (with suffix -ald)
from riber be wanton, sleep around, dally amorously, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
riban be wanton, literally to rub, possibly from the common euphemistic use of rub words to mean
have sex), from Proto-Germanic *wribanan, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).


petulant (adj.)

1590s, immodest, wanton, saucy, from Middle French petulant (mid-14c.), from Latin petulantem
(nominative petulans) wanton, froward, saucy, insolent, present participle of petere to attack,
assail; strive after; ask for, beg, beseech (see petition (n.)). Meaning peevish, irritable first
recorded 1775, probably by influence of pet (n.2). Related: Petulantly.


giglot (n.)

lewd, wanton woman (mid-14c.); later a giddy, romping girl; of unknown origin; compare gig (n.1).


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


Ionian (adj.)

of Ionia, the districts of ancient Greece inhabited by the Ionians (including Attica and the north
coast of the Peloponnesus, but especially the coastal strip of Asia Minor, including the islands of
Samos and Chios). The name (which Herodotus credits to an ancestral Ion, son of Apollo and Creusa)
probably is pre-Greek, perhaps related to Sanskrit yoni womb, vulva, and a reference to goddess-
worshipping people.    Also used of the sea that lies between Italy and the northern Peloponnesus
(1630s). The musical Ionian mode (1844) corresponds to our basic major scale but was characterized
by the Greeks as soft and effeminate, as were the Ionians generally.  The Ionians delighted in
wanton dances and songs more than the rest of the Greeks ... and wanton gestures were proverbially
termed Ionic motions. [Thomas Robinson, Arch&aelig;ologica Gr&aelig;ca, 1807]


lust (n.)

Old English lust desire, appetite, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *lustuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Dutch, German lust, Old Norse lyst, Gothic lustus pleasure, desire, lust), from PIE *las-
to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Latin lascivus wanton, playful, lustful; see lascivious).
In Middle English, any source of pleasure or delight, also an appetite, also a liking for a person,
also fertility (of soil). Sense of sinful sexual desire, degrading animal passion (now the main
meaning) developed in late Old English from the word's use in Bible translations (such as lusts of
the flesh to render Latin concupiscentia carnis [I John ii:16]); the cognate words in other Germanic
languages tend still to mean simply pleasure.


romp (n.)

1734, piece of lively play, from romp (v.). From 1706 as a wanton girl (probably a variant of ramp
(n.2)).


womanly (adj.)

c.1200, of a man, wanton, lascivious; late 14c. of a woman, feminine, of qualities, proper to a
woman; from woman + -ly (1). From c.1400 of men with the sense effeminate, weak.  Related:
Womanliness.


hen (n.)

Old English henn, from West Germanic *hannjo (cognates: Old Frisian henn, Middle Dutch henne, Old
High German henna), fem. of *han(e)ni male fowl, cock (source of Old English hana cock), literally
bird who sings (for sunrise), from PIE root *kan- to sing (see chant).    The original masculine
word survives in German (Hahn cock), Swedish, Danish, etc. German also has a generic form, Huhn, for
either gender of the bird. Extension to female of any bird species is early 14c. in English. Hen as
slang for woman dates from 1620s; hence hen party gathering of women, first recorded 1887. To be mad
as a wet hen is from 1823, but the figure was used to indicate other states:    Some, on the
contrary, are viciously opposite to these, who act so tamely and so coldly, that when they ought to
be angry, to thunder and lighten, as one may say, they are no fuller of Heat, than a wet Hen, as the
Saying is; .... [Life of Mr. Thomas Betterton, London, 1710]   <hr />   Orth. Out upon you for a
dastardly Fellow; you han't the Courage of a wet Hen. [A Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, March
27, 1704]   As wanton as a wet hen is in Scots Proverbs (1813). Among Middle English proverbial
expressions was nice as a nonne hen over-refined, fastidiously wanton (c.1500); to singen so hen in
snowe sing miserably, literally sing like a hen in snow (c.1200). Hen's teeth as a figure of
scarceness is attested by 1838.


skit (n.)

piece of light satire or caricature, 1820, from earlier sense a satirical remark or reflection
(1727), originally (1570s) a vain, frivolous, or wanton girl (originally Scottish, now archaic),
related to verb meaning to shy or be skittish, caper, frolic (1610s), perhaps from Old Norse skjuta
to shoot, move quickly (see skittish).


lubric (adj.)

smooth, slippery, late 15c., also lascivious, wanton, from Middle French lubrique (15c.) or directly
from Latin lubricus slippery (see lubricant (adj.)). Related: Lubrical.


riotous (adj.)

mid-14c., troublesome, wanton, extravagant, from Old French riotos argumentative, quarrelsome, from
riote (see riot (n.)). Meaning tumultuous, turbulent is mid-15c. Related: Riotously; riotousness.


hubris (n.)

also hybris, 1884, a back-formation from hubristic or else from Greek hybris wanton violence,
insolence, outrage, originally presumption toward the gods; the first element probably PIE *ud- up,
out, but the meaning of the second is  debated.


bouncer (n.)

mid-19c. in various senses, noun derivative of bounce (v.) in its original sense of thump, hit.
Earliest attested is boaster, bully, braggart (1833); also large example of its kind (1842);
enforcer of order in a bar or saloon (1865, American English, originally colloquial).  The Bouncer
is merely the English chucker out. When liberty verges on license and gaiety on wanton delirium, the
Bouncer selects the gayest of the gay, and -- bounces him! [London Daily News, July 26, 1883]


skylark (v.)

to frolic or play, 1809, originally nautical, in reference to wanton play about the rigging, and
tops, probably from skylark (n.), influenced by (or from) lark (n.2). Related: Skylarked;
skylarking.


redhead (n.)

mid-13c., from red (adj.1) + head (n.). Red (adj.), of persons, having red hair is from late Old
English.The Carrot pate be sure you hate, for she'l be true to no man,  But put her too 't and she
will do 't, and oft turns very common:  She that is red upon the head will doubtless ne'r forsake
it,  But wanton be, assuredly, and willingly will take it.  [The True Lover's Admonition, Roxburghe
Ballads, c.1680]


prurient (adj.)

1630s, itching, later, and now exclusively, having an itching desire (1650s), especially lascivious,
lewd, (1746), from Latin prurientem (nominative pruriens), present participle of prurire to itch; to
long for, be wanton, perhaps related to pruna glowing coals, from PIE root *preus- to freeze; burn
(see freeze (v.)). Related: Pruriently.


gigolo (n.)

1922, from French gigolo, formed as a masc. of gigole tall, thin woman; dancing girl; prostitute,
perhaps from verb gigoter to move the shanks, hop, from gigue shank, also fiddle, of Germanic
origin. This is perhaps the same word that was borrowed earlier as Middle English giglot (early
14c.) lewd, wanton girl, which was later applied to males (mid-15c.) with the sense villainous man.
Middle English gigletry meant lasciviousness, harlotry (late 14c.).


minx (n.)

1540s, mynx pet dog, later a young, pert, wanton girl [Johnson] (1590s), of uncertain origin,
perhaps a shortening of minikin girl, woman, from Middle Dutch minnekijn darling, beloved, from
minne love (see minnesinger) + -kijn, diminutive suffix. Klein's sources suggest the word is from
Low German minsk a man, also an impudent woman, related to German Mensch (see mensch), which also
has a sense in vulgar use of wench, hussy, slut.


riot (n.)

c.1200, debauchery, extravagance, wanton living, from Old French riote (12c.) dispute, quarrel,
(tedious) talk, chattering, argument, domestic strife, also a euphemism for sexual intercourse, of
uncertain origin. Compare Medieval Latin riota quarrel, dispute, uproar, riot. Perhaps from Latin
rugire to roar.  Meaning public disturbance is first recorded late 14c. Meaning something
spectacularly successful first recorded 1909 in theater slang.   Run riot is first recorded 1520s, a
metaphoric extension from Middle English meaning in reference to hounds following the wrong scent.
The Riot Act, part of which must be read to a mob before active measures can be taken, was passed
1714 (1 Geo. I, st.2, c.5). Riot girl and alternative form riot grrl first recorded 1992.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


