ward (n.)

Old English weard a guarding, protection; watchman, sentry, keeper, from Proto-Germanic *wardaz
guard (cognates: Old Saxon ward, Old Norse v&ouml;r&eth;r, Old High German wart), from PIE *war-o-,
from root *wer- (4) perceive, watch out for (cognates: Latin vereri to observe with awe, revere,
respect, fear; Greek ouros a guard, watchman, and possibly horan to see; Hittite werite- to see).
Used for administrative districts (at first in the sense of guardianship) from late 14c.; of
hospital divisions from 1749. Meaning minor under control of a guardian is from early 15c. Ward-
heeler is 1890, from heeler loafer, one on the lookout for shady work (1870s).


ward (v.)

Old English weardian to keep guard, watch, protect, preserve, from Proto-Germanic *wardon to guard
(cognates: Old Saxon wardon, Old Norse var&eth;a to guard, Old Frisian wardia, Middle Dutch waerden
to take care of, Old High German warten to guard, look out for, expect, German warten to wait, wait
on, nurse, tend), from PIE *war-o- (see ward (n.)). French garder, Italian guardare, Spanish guardar
are Germanic loan-words. Meaning to parry, to fend off (now usually with off) is recorded from
1570s. Related: Warded; warding.


warden (n.)

c.1200, one who guards, from Old North French wardein, from Frankish *warding- (which became Old
French guardenc), from Proto-Germanic *wardon to watch, guard (see ward (v.)). Meaning governor of a
prison is recorded from c.1300.


warder (n.)

c.1400, guardian of an entrance, from Anglo-French wardere, wardour guardian, keeper, custodian (Old
French gardeor), agent noun from Old North French warder to guard, keep, maintain, uphold (Old
French garder), from Frankish *wardon, from Proto-Germanic *wardon to guard (see ward (v.)).


wardrobe (n.)

early 14c., room where wearing apparel is kept, earlier a private chamber (c.1300), from Old North
French warderobe, wardereube (Old French garderobe) dressing-room, place where garments are kept,
from warder to keep, guard (see ward (v.)) + robe garment (see robe (n.)). Meaning a person's stock
of clothes for wearing is recorded from c.1400. Sense of movable closed cupboard for wearing apparel
is recorded from 1794. Meaning room in which theatrical costumes are kept is attested from 1711.
Wardrobe malfunction is from 2004.


parry (v.)

1630s, from French parez! (which commonly would have been heard in fencing lessons), imperative of
parer ward off, from Italian parare to ward or defend a blow (see para- (2)). Related: Parried;
parrying. Non-fencing use is from 1718. The noun is 1705, from the verb.


Arcturus

late 14c., bright star in the constellation Bootes (also used of the whole constellation), from
Latin Arcturus, from Greek Arktouros; anciently associated with the Bear, and its name is Greek for
guardian of the bear. See arctic; second element is from ouros watcher, guardian, ward, from PIE
root *wer- (4) perceive (see ward (n.)).   Arcturus in the Bible (Job ix:9 and xxxviii:32) is a
mistranslation by Jerome (continued in KJV) of Hebrew 'Ayish, which refers to what we see as the
bowl of the Big Dipper. In Israel and Arabia, the seven stars of the Great Bear seem to have been a
bier (the bowl) followed by three mourners. In the Septuagint it was translated as Pleiada, which is
equally incorrect. The double nature of the great bear/wagon (see Big Dipper) has given two
different names to the constellation that follows it: Arktouros bear-ward and bootes the wagoner.


-ward

adverbial suffix expressing direction, Old English -weard toward, literally turned toward, sometimes
-weardes, with genitive singular ending of neuter adjectives, from Proto-Germanic *warth (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Frisian -ward, Old Norse -ver&eth;r), variant of PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root
*wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). The original notion is of turned toward.


pupil (n.1)

student, late 14c., originally orphan child, ward, from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from
Latin pupillus (fem. pupilla) orphan child, ward, minor, diminutive of pupus boy (fem. pupa girl),
probably related to puer child, possibly from PIE *pup-, from root *pu- to swell, inflate. Meaning
disciple, student first recorded 1560s. Related: Pupillary.


sheela-na-gig (n.)

1846, from Irish Sile na gcioch, literally Sheila of the breasts [OED]. According to modern
folklorists, not a Celtic survival, but originating rather in the Romanesque churches of France and
northern Spain. Their theories that it is meant to degrade the female body and discourage sexuality,
or that it is meant as an apotropaic gesture to ward off the devil, are not entirely convincing.


forward (adv.)

Old English forewearde toward the front; see fore + -ward. Adjectival sense of early is from 1520s;
that of presumptuous is attested from 1560s.


thusly (adv.)

1865 (in an Artemus Ward dialect humor piece), from thus + -ly (2). A double adverb. Perhaps
originally a humorous or mocking over-correction of thus; it has gained some currency but earns
frowns for the user.


leeward (adj.)

1660s, situated away from the wind, on the opposite of the weather side of the ship; from lee +
-ward.


wiki (n.)

web page that can be edited by browsers, by 2002, abstracted from names of such sites (such as
Wikipedia, launched January 2001), the original being WikiWikiWeb, introduced and named by Ward
Cunningham in 1995, from Hawaiian wikiwiki fast, swift.


rearward (adv.)

1590s, from rear (adj.) + -ward.


sternward (adj.)

1832, from stern (n.) + -ward.


abracadabra

magical formula, 1690s, from Latin (Q. Severus Sammonicus, 2c.), from Late Greek Abraxas, cabalistic
or gnostic name for the supreme god, and thus a word of power. It was written out in a triangle
shape and worn around the neck to ward off sickness, etc. Another magical word, from a mid-15c.
writing, was ananizapta.


eastward (adv.)

Old English eastw&aelig;rde; see east + -ward.


leftward (adv.)

late 15c., from left (adj.) + -ward. Related: Leftwards.


forfend (v.)

also forefend, late 14c., to protect, prohibit; to avert, prevent, a hybrid from for- + fend, from
Latin defendere to ward off.


windward (adj.)

on the side toward which the wind blows, 1540s, from wind (n.1) + -ward.


Seminole (n.)

1763, from Creek (Muskogean) simano:li, earlier simalo:ni wild, untamed, runaway, from American
Spanish cimarron (see maroon (v.)). They fought ward against U.S. troops 1817-18 and 1835-42, after
which they largely were removed to Indian Territory (Oklahoma).


southward (adj.)

Old English su&#240;weard; see south + -ward.


Edward

masc. proper name, from Old English Eadweard, literally prosperity-guard, from ead wealth,
prosperity + weard guardian (see ward (n.)). Among the 10 most popular names for boys born in the
U.S. every year from 1895 to 1930.


onward (adv.)

late 14c., from on + -ward. The form onwards, with adverbial genitive -s-, is attested from c.1600.


Alexis

masc. proper name, from Greek alexis, from alexein to ward off, keep, protect (see Alexander). The
Latin form was Alexius.


para- (2)

word-forming element meaning defense, protection against; that which protects from, from Italian
para, imperative of parare to ward off, from Latin parare make ready (see pare).


panorama (n.)

1796, a painting on a revolving cylindrical surface, coined c.1789 by inventor, Irish artist Robert
Barker, literally a complete view, from pan- all + Greek horama sight, spectacle, that which is
seen, from horan to look, see, possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)). Meaning
comprehensive survey is 1801.


northward (adv.)

Old English nor&#240;weard; see north + -ward. Related: Northwards.


kazoo (n.)

1884, American English, probably altered from earlier bazoo trumpet (1877); probably ultimately
imitative (compare bazooka). In England, formerly called a Timmy Talker, in France, a
mirliton.Kazoos, the great musical wonder, ... anyone can play it; imitates fowls, animals,
bagpipes, etc. [1895 Montgomery Ward catalogue, p.245]  But mostly etc.


westward (adv.)

toward the west, Old English westweard; see west + -ward.


ephor (n.)

Spartan magistrate, 1580s, from Greek ephoros overseer, from epi- over (see epi-) + horan to see,
possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)).


awkward (adj.)

mid-14c., in the wrong direction, from awk back-handed + adverbial suffix -weard (see -ward).
Meaning clumsy first recorded 1520s. Related: Awkwardly. Other formations from awk, none of them
surviving, were awky, awkly, awkness.


watch (n.)

Old English w&aelig;cce a watching, state of being or remaining awake, wakefulness; also act or
practice of refraining from sleep for devotional or penitential purposes; from w&aelig;ccan (see
watch (v.)). From c.1200 as one of the periods into which the night is divided, in reference to
ancient times translating Latin vigilia, Greek phylake, Hebrew ashmoreth.    The Hebrews divided the
night into three watches, the Greeks usually into four (sometimes five), the Romans (followed by the
Jews in New Testament times) into four. [OED]   <hr />   On &#254;is niht be&#240; fowuer niht
wecches: Biforen euen &#254;e bilimpe&#240; to children; Mid-niht &#240;e bilimpe&#240; to
frumberdligges; hanecrau &#254;e bilimpe&#240; &#254;owuene men; morgewile to alde men. [Trinity
Homilies, c.1200]     From mid-13c. as a shift of guard duty; an assignment as municipal watchman;
late 13c. as person or group obligated to patrol a town (especially at night) to keep order, etc.
Also in Middle English, the practice of remaining awake at night for purposes of debauchery and
dissipation; hence wacches of wodnesse late-night revels and debauchery. The alliterative
combination watch and ward preserves the old distinction of watch for night-time municipal patrols
and ward for guarding by day; in combination, they meant continuous vigilance.    Military sense of
military guard, sentinel is from late 14c. General sense of careful observation, watchfulness,
vigilance is from late 14c.; to keep watch is from late 14c. Meaning period of time in which a
division of a ship's crew remains on deck is from 1580s. The meaning small timepiece is from 1580s,
developing from that of a clock to wake up sleepers (mid-15c.).


froward (adv.)

Old English fromweard turned from or away, from from + -weard (see -ward). Opposite of toward, it
renders Latin pervertus in early translations of the Psalms, and also meant about to depart,
departing, and doomed to die. Related: Frowardly; frowardness.


downward (adv.)

c.1200, from down (adv.) + -ward. Old English had aduneweard in this sense. Downwards, with
adverbial genitive, had a parallel in Old English ofduneweardes.


arcane (adj.)

1540s, from Latin arcanus secret, hidden, private, concealed, from arcere close up, enclose,
contain, from arca chest, box, place for safe-keeping, from PIE *ark- to hold, contain, guard
(cognates: Greek arkos defense, arkein to ward off; Armenian argel obstacle; Lithuanian raktas key,
rakinti to shut, lock).


alectryomancy (n.)

divination by means of a cock and grains of corn, 1680s, from Latinized form of Greek alektryon cock
+ manteia oracle (see -mancy). The first element is literally warder-off, fighter, related to
alexein to ward off, drive or keep off (see Alexander, and compare Alekto, name of one of the three
Furies). Perhaps originally a personal name, applied at first to the fighting cock, then to cocks
generally.


shotgun (n.)

1821, American English, from shot (n.) in the sense of lead in small pellets (1770) + gun (n.). As
distinguished from a rifle, which fires bullets. Shotgun wedding first attested 1903, American
English. To ride shotgun is 1963, from custom of having an armed man beside the driver on the
stagecoach in Old West movies to ward off trouble.


afterward (adv.)

Old English &aelig;ftanweard, from &aelig;ftan after (see aft) + -weard suffix indicating direction
(see -ward); nautical use as aftward, then expanded by influence of after; variant afterwards shows
adverbial genitive.


ware (v.)

to take heed of, beware, Old English warian to guard against, beware; protect, defend, from Proto-
Germanic *waraz (cognates: Old Frisian waria, Old Norse vara), from PIE *war-o- to guard, watch,
from root *wer- (4) to perceive, watch out for (see ward (n.)).


coerce (v.)

mid-15c., cohercen, from Middle French cohercer, from Latin coercere to control, restrain, shut up
together, from com- together (see co-) + arcere to enclose, confine, contain, ward off, from PIE
*ark- to hold, contain, guard (see arcane). Related: Coerced; coercing. No record of the word
between late 15c. and mid-17c.; its reappearance 1650s is perhaps a back-formation from coercion.


inward

Old English inweard, inneweard (adj., adv.) inmost; sincere; internal, intrinsic; deep, from Proto-
Germanic *inwarth inward (cognates: Old Norse innanver&eth;r, Old High German inwart, Middle Dutch
inwaert), from root of Old English inne in (see in) + -weard (see -ward).


toward (prep.)

Old English toweard in the direction of, prepositional use of toweard (adj.) coming, facing,
approaching, from to (see to) + -ward.


buckler (n.)

small, round shield used to ward off blows, c.1300, from Old French bocler boss (of a shield),
shield, buckler (12c., Modern French bouclier), from Latin *buccularius (adj.) having a boss, from
buccula (see buckle (n.)).


barrio (n.)

1841, ward of a Spanish or Spanish-speaking city, sometimes also used of rural settlements, from
Spanish barrio district, suburb, from Arabic barriya open country (fem.), from barr outside (of the
city). Main modern sense of Spanish-speaking district in a U.S. city is 1939; original reference is
to Spanish Harlem in New York City.


Alexander

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Greek Alexandros defender of men, from alexein to ward off, keep
off, turn (something) away, defend, protect + aner (genitive andros) man (see anthropo-). The first
element is related to Greek alke protection, help, strength, power, courage, alkimos strong; cognate
with Sanskrit raksati protects, Old English ealgian to defend. As a kind of cocktail, it is attested
from 1930.


wayward (adj.)

late 14c., shortening of aweiward turned away, from way (adv.), shortening of away + -ward. Related:
Waywardly; waywardness.


homeward (adv.)

mid-13c., homward, from Old English ham weard; see home (n.) + -ward. Also Homewards, with adverbial
genitive -s (Old English hamweardes).


autarky (n.)

1610s, self-sufficiency, from Greek autarkeia sufficiency in oneself, independence, from autarkes
self-sufficient, having enough, independent of others (also used of countries), from autos self (see
auto-) + arkein to ward off, keep off, also to be strong enough, sufficient, from PIE root *ark- to
hold, contain, guard (see arcane). From a different Greek source than autarchy, and thus the
spelling. As a term in international economics, prominent late 1930s. Related: Autarkic.


