warp (n.)

threads running lengthwise in a fabric, Old English wearp, from Proto-Germanic *warpo- (cognates:
Middle Low German warp, Old High German warf warp, Old Norse varp cast of a net), from PIE *werp- to
turn, bend (see warp (v.)). The warp of fabric is that across which the woof is thrown. Applied in
20c. astrophysics to the fabric of space-time, popularized in noun phrase warp speed by 1960s TV
series Star Trek.


warp (v.)

to bend, twist, distort, Old English weorpan to throw, throw away, hit with a missile, from Proto-
Germanic *werpan to fling by turning the arm (cognates: Old Saxon werpan, Old Norse verpa to throw,
Swedish v&auml;rpa to lay eggs, Old Frisian werpa, Middle Low German and Dutch werpen, German
werfen, Gothic wairpan to throw), from PIE *werp- to turn, wind, bend (cognates: Latin verber whip,
rod; Greek rhabdos rod, rhombos magic wheel), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Connection between turning and throwing is perhaps in the notion of rotating the arm in the act of
throwing; compare Old Church Slavonic vre&#353;ti to throw, from the same PIE root. The meaning
twist out of shape is first recorded c.1400; intransitive sense is from mid-15c. Related: Warped;
warping.


stamina (n.)

1670s, rudiments or original elements of something, from Latin stamina threads, plural of stamen
(genitive staminis) thread, warp (see stamen). Sense of power to resist or recover, strength,
endurance first recorded 1726 (originally plural), from earlier meaning congenital vital capacities
of a person or animal; also in part from use of the Latin word in reference to the threads spun by
the Fates (such as queri nimio de stamine too long a thread of life), and partly from a figurative
use of Latin stamen the warp (of cloth) on the notion of the warp as the foundation of a fabric.
Related: Staminal.


cast (v.)

c.1200, to throw, fling, hurl, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse kasta to throw (cognate
with Swedish kasta, Danish kaste, North Frisian kastin), of uncertain origin. Meaning to form in a
mold is late 15c. In the sense of warp, turn it replaced Old English weorpan (see warp (v.)), and
itself largely has been superseded now by throw, though cast still is used of fishing lines and
glances. Meaning calculate, find by reckoning; chart (a course) is from c.1300.


stamen (n.)

pollen-bearing organ of a flower, 1660s, from Modern Latin (1625, Spigelus), from Latin stamen
stamen (Pliny), literally foundation in weaving, thread of the warp in the upright loom (related to
stare to stand), from PIE *sta-men- (cognates: Greek stemon warp, also used by Hesychius for some
part of a plant, Gothic stoma, Sanskrit sthaman place, also strength), from root *sta- to stand (see
stet). The usual English plural is stamens because of the special use of the classical plural,
stamina.


mitosis (n.)

1887, coined in German from Greek mitos warp thread (see mitre) + Modern Latin -osis act, process.
Term introduced by German anatomist Walther Fleming (1843-1905) in 1882. So called because chromatin
of the cell nucleus appears as long threads in the first stages.


tantra (n.)

type of Hindu religious book, 1799, from Sanskrit tantram, literally loom, warp, hence,
figuratively, groundwork, system, doctrine, from tan to stretch, extend, from PIE root *ten- to
stretch, extend (see tenet).


histo-

medical word-forming element, from Greek histos warp, web, literally anything set upright, from
histasthai to stand, from PIE *sta- to stand (see stet). Taken by 19c. medical writers as the best
Greek root from which to form terminology for tissue.


verbena (n.)

genus of plants, the vervain, 1560s, from Latin verbena leaves or twigs of olive, myrtle, laurel, or
other sacred plants employed in religious ceremonies, from PIE *werbh- (cognates: Lithuanian virbas
twig, branch, scion, rod), from root *werb- to turn, bend (see warp (v.)).


overthrow (v.)

early 14c., to knock down, from over- + throw (v.). Figurative sense of to cast down from power,
defeat is attested from late 14c. Related: Overthrown; overthrowing. Earlier in same senses was
overwerpen to overturn (something), overthrow; destroy, from Old English oferweorpan (see warp
(v.)).


crinoline (n.)

1830, from French crinoline hair cloth (19c.), from Italian crinolino, from crino horsehair (from
Latin crinis hair) + lino flax, thread, from Latin linum (see linen). So called from the warp and
woof fibers of the original mixture.


dimity (n.)

mid-15c., from Italian dimiti, plural of dimito, a name for a kind of strong cotton cloth, from
Medieval Latin dimitum, from Greek dimitos of double thread, from di- (see di- (1)) + mitos warp
thread, thread (see mitre).


toil (n.2)

net, snare, 1520s, from Middle French toile hunting net, cloth, web (compare toile d'araign&eacute;e
cobweb), from Old French toile cloth (11c.), from Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric, from PIE
*teks- to weave (see texture (n.)). Now used largely in plural (as in caught in the toils of the
law).


buckle (v.2)

distort, warp, bend out of shape 1520s, bokelen to arch the body, from Middle French boucler to
bulge, from Old French bocler to bulge, from bocle boss of a shield (see buckle (n.)). Meaning bend
under strong pressure is from 1590s (figurative from 1640s) . Related: Buckled; buckling.


woof (n.1)

weft, texture, fabric, Old English owef, from o- on + wefan to weave (see weave). With excrescent
-w- by influence of warp or weft.


cast (n.)

mid-13c., a throw, an act of throwing, from cast (v.). In early use especially of dice, hence
figurative uses relating to fortune or fate. Meaning that which is cast is from c.1550s. Meaning
dash or shade of color is from c.1600. The sense of a throw carried an idea of the form the thing
takes after it has been thrown, which led to widespread and varied meanings, such as group of actors
in a play (1630s). OED finds 42 distinct noun meaning and 83 verbal ones, with many sub-definitions.
Many of the figurative senses converged in a general meaning sort, kind, style (mid-17c.). A cast in
the eye (early 14c.) preserves the older verbal sense of warp, turn.


moldwarp (n.)

also mouldwarp, early 14c., moldewarp, from Proto-Germanic *moldo-worpo(n)-, literally earth-
thrower, from to Old English molde earth, soil (see mole (n.2) + weorpan to throw (see warp (v.)).
Common Germanic, compare Old Saxon moldwerp, Dutch mulworp, Norwegian moldvarp, Danish muldvarp, Old
High German multwurf, German Maulwurf (influenced by Maul mouth).


samite (n.)

type of rich silk cloth, c.1300, from Old French samit, from Medieval Latin samitum, examitum, from
Medieval Greek hexamiton (source of Old Church Slavonic oksamitu, Russian aksamit velvet), noun use
of neuter of Greek adjective hexamitos six-threaded, from hex six (see six) + mitos warp thread (see
mitre (n.)). The reason it was called this is variously explained. Obsolete c.1600; revived by
Tennyson. German Sammet velvet is from French.


rhabdomancy (n.)

1640s, use of divining rod (especially to discover ores or underground water), from Greek rhabdos
rod, wand; magic wand; fishing rod; spear-shaft; a staff of office; a rod for chastisement; twig,
stick + manteia divination, oracle (see -mancy). Greek rhabdos is from PIE *wer-, base of roots
meaning to turn, bend (cognates: Lithuanian virbas twig, branch, scion, rod, Latin verbena leaves
and branches of laurel); see warp (v.); the Greek noun was used to represent Roman fasces. Related:
Rhabdomantic


mitre (n.)

bishop's tall hat, late 14c., from Old French mitre, from Latin mitra headband, turban, from Greek
mitra headband, turban, earlier a belt or cloth worn under armor about the waist, from PIE root
*mei- to tie (cognates: Sanskrit Mitrah, Old Persian Mithra-, god names; Russian mir world, peace,
Greek mitos a warp thread). In Latin, a kind of headdress common among Asiatics, the wearing of
which by men was regarded in Rome as a mark of effeminacy [OED]. But the word was used in Vulgate to
translate Hebrew micnepheth headdress of a priest.


reverberation (n.)

late 14c., reflection of light or heat, from Old French reverberacion great flash of light; intense
quality, from Medieval Latin reverberationem (nominative reverberatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin reverberare beat back, strike back, repel, cause to rebound, from re- back
(see re-) + verberare to strike, to beat, from verber whip, lash, rod, related to verbena leaves and
branches of laurel, from PIE *werb- to turn, bend (see warp (v.)). Sense of an echo is attested from
1620s.


shuttle (n.)

Old English scytel a dart, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *skutilaz (cognates: Old Norse skutill
harpoon), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see shoot (v.)). The original
sense in English is obsolete; the weaving instrument so called (mid-14c.) from being shot across the
threads. Sense of train that runs back and forth is first recorded 1895, from image of the weaver's
instrument's back-and-forth movement over the warp; extended to aircraft 1942, to spacecraft 1969.
In some other languages, the weaving instrument takes its name from its resemblance to a boat (Latin
navicula, French navette, German weberschiff).


mule (n.1)

offspring of donkey and horse, from Old English mul, Old French mul mule, hinny (12c., fem. mule),
both from Latin mulus (fem. mula) a mule, probably from a pre-Latin Mediterranean language.The mule
combines the strength of the horse with the endurance and surefootedness of the ass, and is
extensively bred for certain employments for which it is more suited than either; it is ordinarily
incapable of procreation. With no good grounds, the mule is a proverbial type of obstinacy.
[OED]Properly, the offspring of a he-ass and a mare; that of a she-ass and a stallion is technically
a hinny. Used allusively of hybrids and things of mixed nature. As a type of spinning machine,
attested from 1797 (so called because a hybrid of distinct warp and woof machines). Meaning
obstinate, stupid, or stubborn person is from 1470s; that of narcotics smuggler or courier first
attested 1935.


texture (n.)

early 15c., network, structure, from Middle French texture and directly from Latin textura web,
texture, structure, from stem of texere to weave, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to
make; make wicker or wattle framework (cognates: Sanskrit taksati he fashions, constructs, taksan
carpenter; Avestan ta&#353;a ax, hatchet, thwax&#353;- be busy; Old Persian tax&#353;- be active;
Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric; Greek tekton carpenter, tekhne art; Old Church Slavonic tesla
ax, hatchet; Lithuanian tasau to carve; Old Irish tal cooper's ax; Old High German dahs, German
Dachs badger, literally builder; Hittite taksh- to join, unite, build). Meaning structural character
is recorded from 1650s. Related: Textural.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


throw (v.)

to project, propel, c.1300, from Old English &thorn;rawan to twist, turn, writhe, curl, (past tense
&thorn;reow, past participle &thorn;rawen), from Proto-Germanic *threw- (cognates: Old Saxon
thraian, Middle Dutch dr&aelig;yen, Dutch draaien, Old High German draen, German drehen to turn,
twist; not found in Scandinavian or Gothic), from PIE *tere- (1) to rub, turn, rub by turning, bore
(cognates: Sanskrit turah wounded, hurt, Greek teirein to rub, rub away, Latin terere to rub,
thresh, grind, wear away, Old Church Slavonic tiro to rub, Lithuanian trinu to rub, Old Irish
tarathar borer, Welsh taraw to strike).    Not the usual Old English word for to throw (weorpan,
related to warp (v.) was common in this sense). The sense evolution may be via the notion of
whirling a missile before throwing it. The sense of put by force (as in throw in jail) is first
recorded 1550s; that of confuse, flabbergast is from 1844; that of lose deliberately is from 1868.
To throw the book at (someone) is 1932, from notion of judge sentencing a criminal from a law book
full of possible punishments. To throw (one's) hat in the ring issue a challenge, especially to
announce one's candidacy, first recorded 1917. To throw up vomit is first recorded 1732. To throw
(someone) off confuse by a false scent is from 1891.


time (n.)

Old English tima limited space of time, from Proto-Germanic *timon- time (cognates: Old Norse timi
time, proper time, Swedish timme an hour), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- cut up,
divide (see tide (n.)).    Abstract sense of time as an indefinite continuous duration is recorded
from late 14c. Personified since at least 1509 as an aged bald man (but with a forelock) carrying a
scythe and an hour-glass. In English, a single word encompasses time as extent and point (French
temps/fois, German zeit/mal) as well as hour (as in what time is it? compare French heure, German
Uhr). Extended senses such as occasion, the right time, leisure, or times (v.) multiplied by
developed in Old and Middle English, probably as a natural outgrowth of such phrases as He commends
her a hundred times to God (Old French La comande a Deu cent foiz).  to have a good time ( = a time
of enjoyment) was common in Eng. from c 1520 to c 1688; it was app. retained in America, whence
readopted in Britain in 19th c. [OED]   Time of day (now mainly preserved in negation, i.e. what
someone won't give you if he doesn't like you) was a popular 17c. salutation (as in Good time of day
vnto your Royall Grace, Richard III, I.iii.18). The times the current age is from 1590s. Behind the
times old-fashioned is recorded from 1831. Times as the name of a newspaper dates from 1788.   Time
warp first attested 1954; time-traveling in the science fiction sense first recorded 1895 in H.G.
Wells' The Time Machine. Time capsule first recorded 1938, in reference to the one deemed capable of
resisting the effects of time for five thousand years preserving an account of universal
achievements embedded in the grounds of the New York World's fair.    Jones [archaeologist of A.D.
5139] potters about for a while in the region which we have come to regard as New York, finds
countless ruins, but little of interest to the historian except a calcified direction sheet to
something called a Time Capsule. Jones finds the capsule but cannot open it, and decides, after
considerable prying at the lid, that it is merely evidence of an archaic tribal ceremony called a
publicity gag of which he has already found many examples. [Princeton Alumni Weekly, April 14, 1939]
To do time serve a prison sentence is from 1865. Time frame is attested by 1964; time-limit is from
1880. About time, ironically for long past due time, is recorded from 1920.


