warrant (n.)

c.1200, protector, defender, from Old North French warant defender; surety, pledge; justifying
evidence (Old French garant), from Frankish *warand, from Proto-Germanic *war- to warn, guard,
protect (cognates: Old High German werento guarantor, noun use of present participle of weren to
authorize, warrant; German gew&auml;hren to grant), from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover (see weir).
Sense evolved via notion of permission from a superior which protects one from blame or
responsibility (early 14c.) to document conveying authority (1510s). A warrant officer in the
military is one who holds office by warrant (as from a government department), rather than by
commission (from a head of state).


warrant (v.)

late 13c., to keep safe from danger, from Old North French warantir safeguard, protect; guarantee,
pledge (Old French garantir), from warant (see warrant (n.)). Meaning to guarantee to be of quality
is attested from late 14c.; sense of to guarantee as true is recorded from c.1300. Related:
Warranted; warranting; warrantable.


warrantee (n.)

person to whom a warranty is given, 1706, from warrant (v.) + -ee.


warranty (n.)

mid-14c., legal term for various types of clauses in real estate transactions, from Anglo-French and
Old North French warantie protection, defense, safeguard (Old French garantie), from warant (see
warrant (n.)).


guarantee (n.)

1670s, alterted (perhaps via Spanish garante), from earlier garrant warrant that the title to a
property is true, early 15c., from Old French garant defender, protector, from Germanic (see warrant
(n.)). For form evolution, see gu-. Originally person giving something as security; sense of the
pledge itself (which is properly a guaranty) developed 17c.


voucher (n.)

1520s, originally summoning of a person into court to warrant the title to a property, a calling to
vouch; see vouch. Meaning receipt from a business transaction is first attested 1690s; sense of
document which can be exchanged for goods or services is attested from 1947.


quo warranto

Medieval Latin, literally by what warrant, from quo from, with, or by whom or what?, ablative of
interrogative pronoun quis who? (see who).


unwarranted (adj.)

1570s, from un- (1) not + past participle of warrant (v.).


attachment (n.)

c.1400, arrest of a person on judicial warrant (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from French attachement,
from attacher (see attach). Application to property (including, later, wages) dates from 1590s;
meaning sympathy, devotion is recorded from 1704; that of something that is attached to something
else dates from 1797 and has become perhaps the most common use since the rise of e-mail.


scurrilous (adj.)

using such language as only the licence of a buffoon can warrant [Johnson], 1570s, from scurrile
coarsely joking (c.1500, implied in scurrility), from Latin scurrilis buffoonlike, from scurra
fashionable city idler, man-about-town, later buffoon. According to Klein, an Etruscan loan-word.
Related: Scurrilously; scurrilousness.


search (n.)

c.1400, act of searching; early 15c., right to investigate illegal activity; examination of records,
wills, etc.; a search through an area or a place, from Anglo-French serche, Old French cerche, from
cerchier (see search (v.)). Search warrant attested from 1739.


beadle (n.)

Old English bydel herald, messenger from an authority, preacher, from beodan to proclaim (see bid).
Sense of warrant officer, tipstaff was in late Old English; that of petty parish officer, which has
given the job a bad reputation, is from 1590s. French b&eacute;deau (Old French bedel, 12c.) is a
Germanic loan-word.


pylorus (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin pylorus the lower orifice of the stomach, from Greek pyloros, literally
gatekeeper, porter, from pyle gate (see pylon) + ouros watcher, guardian (see warrant (n.)).
Related: Pyloric.


seal (v.)

to fasten with (or as with) a seal, c.1200, from seal (n.1). Meaning to place a seal on (a document)
is recorded from mid-14c.; hence to conclude, ratify, render official (late 15c.). Sense of to close
up with wax, lead, cement, etc. is attested from 1660s, from the notion of wax seals on envelopes.
In reference to the actions of wood-coatings, 1940. Related: Sealed; sealing. Sealing-wax is
attested from c.1300. To seal (one's) fate (1799) probably reflects the notion of a seal on an
execution warrant.


replevin (n.)

recovery of goods (by someone) taken from him, upon posting of security, mid-15c., from Anglo-French
replevin (14c.) and Anglo-Latin (13c.) replevina, from Old French replevir (v.) to pledge, protect,
warrant, from re- back, again (see re-) + plevir, of uncertain origin; perhaps related to pledge
(v.). The corresponding verb is replevy (1550s).


beg (v.)

c.1200, perhaps from Old English bedecian to beg, from Proto-Germanic *beth-; or possibly from
Anglo-French begger, from Old French begart (see beggar). The Old English word for beg was
w&aelig;dlian, from w&aelig;dl poverty. Of trained dogs, 1816.    As a courteous mode of asking (beg
pardon, etc.), first attested c.1600. To beg the question translates Latin petitio principii, and
means to assume something that hasn't been proven as a basis of one's argument, thus asking one's
opponent to give something unearned, though more of the nature of taking it for granted without
warrant.


garret (n.)

c.1300, turret, small tower on the roof of a house or castle, from Old French garite watchtower,
place of refuge, from garir defend, preserve, from a Germanic source (compare Gothic warjan forbid,
Old High German warjan to defend), from Proto-Germanic *warjan, from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover
(see warrant (n.)). Meaning room on uppermost floor of a house is from early 14c. See attic. As the
typical wretched abode of a poor poet, by mid-18c.


warren (n.)

late 14c., piece of land enclosed for breeding beasts and fowls, from Anglo-French and Old North
French warenne (Old French garenne) game park, hunting reserve, possibly from Gaulish *varenna
enclosed area, related to *varros post. More likely from the present participle of Old North French
warir (Old French garir) defend, keep, from Proto-Germanic *war- to protect, guard (see warrant
(n.)). Later especially piece of land for breeding of rabbits (c.1400), which led to the transferred
sense of cluster of densely populated living spaces (1640s).


John Doe (n.)

fictitious plaintiff in a legal action, attested from 1768 (in Blackstone). The fictitious defendant
was Richard Roe. If female, Jane Doe, Jane Roe. Replaced earlier John-a-nokes (1530s) or Jack Nokes,
who usually was paired with John-a-stiles or Tom Stiles. Also used of plaintiffs or defendants who
have reason to be anonymous. By 1852, John Doe was being used in North America for any man whose
name is not known, but Britain tended to preserve it in the narrower legal sense name of the
fictitious plaintiff in actions of ejectment. John Doe warrant attested from 1935.


cure (v.)

late 14c., from Old French curer, from Latin curare take care of, hence, in medical language, treat
medically, cure (see cure (n.)). In reference to fish, pork, etc., first recorded 1743. Related:
Cured; curing.    Most words for cure, heal in European languages originally applied to the person
being treated but now can be used with reference to the disease, too. Relatively few show an ancient
connection to words for physician; typically they are connected instead to words for make whole or
tend to or even conjurer. French gu&eacute;rir (with Italian guarir, Old Spanish guarir) is from a
Germanic verb stem also found in in Gothic warjan, Old English wearian ward off, prevent, defend
(see warrant (n.)).


garage (n.)

1902, from French garage shelter for a vehicle, originally a place for storing something, from verb
garer to shelter, from Middle French garer to shelter, dock ships, from Frankish *waron to guard or
some other Germanic source (compare Old High German waron take care), from Proto-Germanic *war-,
from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover (see warrant (n.)).    Influenced no doubt by the success of the
recent Club run, and by the fact that more than 100 of its members are automobile owners, the
N.Y.A.C. has decided to build a garage, the French term for an automobile stable, at Travers Island,
that will be of novel design, entirely different from any station in the country. [New York Athletic
Club Journal, May 1902]   Garage sale first attested 1966.


serve (v.)

late 12c., to render habitual obedience to, also minister, give aid, give help, from Old French
servir to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with, from
Latin servire be a servant, be in service, be enslaved; figuratively be devoted; be governed by;
comply with; conform; flatter, originally be a slave, related to servus slave, perhaps from Etruscan
(compare Etruscan proper names Servi, Serve, Latinized as Servius).    By c.1200 also as to be in
the service of, perform a service for; attend upon, be personal servant to; be a slave; owe
allegiance to; officiate at Mass or other religious rites; from early 13c. as set food at table;
mid-14c. as to wait on (customers). From late 14c. as treat (someone or something) in some fashion.
To serve (someone) right to treat as he deserves is recorded from 1580s.    He no schuld neuer wond
To seruen him fro fot to hond  [Amis and Amiloun, c.1330]    Sense of be useful, be beneficial, be
suitable for a purpose or function is from early 14c.; that of take the place or meet the needs of,
be equal to the task is from late 14c.; that of suffice is from mid-15c. Meaning render active
military service is from 1510s. Sporting sense, in tennis, badminton, etc., first recorded 1580s.
Legal sense present (a writ, warrant,etc.), give legal notice of is from early 15c.


