waver (v.)

late 13c., weyveren, to show indecision, probably related to Old English w&aelig;fre restless,
wavering, from Proto-Germanic *w&aelig;braz (cognates: Middle High German wabern to waver, Old Norse
vafra to hover about), a frequentative form from the root of wave (v.). Related: Wavered; wavering.


unwavering (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + present participle of waver (v.).


vacillation (n.)

c.1400, hesitation, uncertainty, from Latin vacillationem (nominative vacillatio) a reeling,
wavering, noun of action from past participle stem of vacillare sway to and fro, waver, hesitate, be
untrustworthy, of uncertain origin. Originally in reference to opinion or conduct; literal sense is
recorded from 1630s.


vacillate (v.)

1590s, to sway unsteadily, from Latin vacillatus, past participle of vacillare sway to and fro;
hesitate (see vacillation). Meaning to waver between two opinions or courses is recorded from 1620s.
Related: Vacillated; vacillates; vacillating.


dubitation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French dubitation (13c.), from Latin dubitationem (nominative dubitatio)
uncertainty, doubt, noun of state from past participle stem of dubitare to waver in opinion, be
uncertain, doubt, question (related to dubius uncertain; see dubious).


wobble (v.)

1650s, wabble, probably from Low German wabbeln to wobble; cognate with Old Norse vafla hover about,
totter, related to vafra move unsteadily, from Proto-Germanic *wab- to move back and forth, perhaps
from PIE *webh- to weave (see waver). Form with -o- is from 1851. Related: Wobbled; wobbling. The
noun is attested from 1690s.


lapwing (n.)

Middle English lappewinke (late 14c.), lapwyngis (early 15c.), folk etymology alteration of Old
English hleapewince, probably literally leaper-winker, from hleapan to leap + wince totter, waver,
move rapidly, related to wincian to wink. Said to be so called from the manner of its flight [OED]
in reference to its irregular flapping manner of flight [Barnhart], but the lapwing also flaps on
the ground pretending to have a broken wing to lure egg-hunters away from its nest, which seems a
more logical explanation. Its Greek name was polyplagktos luring on deceitfully.


sway (v.)

early 14c., move, go, go quickly; move (something) along, carry, probably from a Scandinavian source
akin to Old Norse sveigja to bend, swing, give way, Old Danish svegja, perhaps merged with an
unrecorded Old English cognate. The whole group might be related to swag (v.) and swing (v.).    The
sense of swing, waver, move in a swaying or sweeping motion is from late 14c. Meaning move from side
to side is from c.1500; transitive sense cause to move from side to side is from 1550s (according to
OED, not common before 19c.). Figurative sense cause to be directed toward one side, prejudice is
from 1590s. Related: Swayed; swaying.


doubt (v.)

early 13c., to dread, fear, from Old French doter doubt, be doubtful; be afraid, from Latin dubitare
to doubt, question, hesitate, waver in opinion (related to dubius uncertain; see dubious),
originally to have to choose between two things.    The sense of fear developed in Old French and
was passed on to English. Meaning to be uncertain is attested in English from c.1300. The -b- was
restored 14c. by scribes in imitation of Latin. Replaced Old English tweogan (noun twynung), from
tweon two, on notion of of two minds or the choice of two implied in Latin dubitare (compare German
Zweifel doubt, from zwei two).


wag (v.)

early 13c. (intransitive), waver, vacillate, lack steadfastness, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse vagga a cradle, Danish vugge rock a cradle, Old Swedish wagga fluctuate, rock a
cradle), and in part from Old English wagian move backwards and forwards; all from Proto-Germanic
*wag- (cognates: Old High German weggen, Gothic wagjan to wag), probably from PIE root *wegh- to
move about (see weigh).    Transitive meaning move (something) back and forth or up and down is from
c.1300; of dogs and their tails from mid-15c.: and whanne they [hounds] see the hure maystre they
wol make him cheere and wagge hur tayles upon him. [Edward, Duke of York, The Master of Game, 1456].
Related: Wagged; wagging. Wag-at-the-wall (1825) was an old name for a hanging clock with pendulum
and weights exposed.


