wean (v.)

Old English wenian to accustom, habituate, from Proto-Germanic *wanjan (cognates: Old Norse venja,
Dutch wennen, Old High German giwennan, German gew&ouml;hnen to accustom), from PIE *won-eyo-, from
root *wen- (1) to desire, strive for. The sense of accustom a child to not suckling from the breast
in Old English was generally expressed by gewenian or awenian, which has a sense of unaccustom
(compare German abgew&ouml;hnen, entw&ouml;hnen to wean, literally to unaccustom). The prefix
subsequently wore off. Figurative extension to any pursuit or habit is from 1520s.


weanling (n.)

1530s, from wean + -ling.


sever (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French severer, Old French sevrer to separate (12c., later in French restricted
to to wean, i.e. to separare from the mother), from Vulgar Latin *seperare, from Latin separare to
separate (see separate (v.)).


towel (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French toaille (12c.), from Frankish *thwahlja, from Proto-Germanic *thwahlijan
(cognates: Old Saxon thwahila, Middle Dutch dwale towel, Dutch dwaal altar cloth, Old High German
dwehila towel, German dialectal Zwehle napkin); related to German zwagen, Old English &thorn;wean to
wash. Spanish toalla, Italian tovaglia are Germanic loan-words. To throw in the towel admit defeat
(1915) is from boxing.


wont (adj.)

accustomed, Middle English contraction of Old English wunod, past participle of wunian to dwell,
inhabit, exist; be accustomed, be used to, from Proto-Germanic *wunen to be content, to rejoice
(cognates: Old Saxon wunon, Old Frisian wonia to dwell, remain, be used to, Old High German wonen,
German wohnen to dwell; related to Old English winnan, gewinnan to win (see win (v.)) and to wean;
from PIE *wen- (1) strive for, desire. The original meaning of the Germanic verbs was be content,
rejoice.


wash (v.)

Old English wascan to wash, cleanse, bathe, transitive sense in late Old English, from Proto-
Germanic *watskan to wash (cognates: Old Norse vaska, Middle Dutch wasscen, Dutch wassen, German
waschen), from stem *wed- water, wet (see water (n.1)). Related: Washed; washing.    Used mainly of
clothes in Old English (the principal verb for washing the body, dishes, etc. being &thorn;wean).
Old French gaschier to stain, soil; soak, wash (Modern French g&#226;cher) is from Frankish *waskan,
from the same Germanic source. Italian guazzare also is a Germanic loan-word. To wash (one's) hands
of something id 1550s, from Pilate in Matt. xxvii.24. To wash up clean utensils after a meal is from
1751. Washed up no longer effective is 1923, theater slang, from notion of washing up at the end of
a job.


Venus

late Old English, from Latin Venus (plural veneres), in ancient Roman mythology, the goddess of
beauty and love, especially sensual love, from venus love, sexual desire; loveliness, beauty, charm;
a beloved object, from PIE root *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire (cognates: Sanskrit veti
follows after, vanas- desire, vanati desires, loves, wins; Avestan vanaiti he wishes, is victorious,
vayeiti hunts; Lithuanian veju to hunt, pursue; Old Church Slavonic voji warrior; Old English
wa&thorn; hunting, wynn joy, wunian to dwell, wenian to accustom, train, wean, wyscan to wish; Old
Norse vei&eth;r chase, hunting, fishing). Applied by the Romans to Greek Aphrodite, Egyptian Hathor,
etc.    Applied in English to any beautiful, attractive woman by 1570s. As the name of the most
brilliant planet from late 13c., from this sense in Latin (Old English called it morgensteorra and
&aelig;fensteorra). The venus fly-trap (Dion&aelig;a muscipula) was discovered 1760 by Gov. Arthur
Dobbs in North Carolina and description sent to Collinson in England. The Central Atlantic Coast
Algonquian name for the plant, /titipiwitshik/, yielded regional American English tippity wichity.


