weary (adj.)

Old English werig tired, exhausted; miserable, sad, related to worian to wander, totter, from Proto-
Germanic *worigaz (cognates: Old Saxon worig weary, Old High German wuorag intoxicated), of unknown
origin.


weary (v.)

Old English wergian to be or become tired (intransitive), gewergian to exhaust, to make tired
(transitive), from the source of weary (adj.). Related: Wearied; wearying.


tire (v.1)

to weary, also to become weary, Old English teorian (Kentish tiorian) to fail, cease; become weary;
make weary, exhaust, of uncertain origin, not found outside English. Related: Tired; tiring.


late (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;t occurring after the customary or expected time, originally slow, sluggish,
from Proto-Germanic *lata- (cognates: Old Norse latr sluggish, lazy, Middle Dutch, Old Saxon lat,
German la&szlig; idle, weary, Gothic lats weary, sluggish, lazy, latjan to hinder), from PIE *led-
slow, weary (cognates: Latin lassus faint, weary, languid, exhausted, Greek ledein to be weary),
from root *le- to let go, slacken (see let (v.)).    The sense of deceased (as in the late Mrs.
Smith) is from late 15c., from an adverbial sense of recently. Of women's menstrual periods,
attested colloquially from 1962. Related: Lateness. As an adverb, from Old English late.


irk (v.)

mid-15c., irken be weary of, be disgusted with; earlier intransitive, to feel weary (early 14c.). Of
uncertain origin, perhaps related to Old Norse yrkja work (from PIE root *werg- to work; see organ),
or Middle High German erken to disgust. Modern sense of annoy is from late 15c. An adjective, irk
weary, tired is attested from c.1300 in northern and midlands writing.


wearisome (adj.)

mid-15c., weary, also causing weariness, from weary + -some (1).


alas

mid-13c., from Old French ha, las (later French h&eacute;las), from ha ah + las unfortunate,
originally tired, weary, from Latin lassus weary (see late). At first an expression of weariness
rather than woe.


daze (v.)

early 14c., dasen, perhaps from Old Norse *dasa (compare dasask to become weary, with reflexive
suffix -sk). Or perhaps from Middle Dutch dasen act silly. Perhaps originally to make weary with
cold, which is the sense of Icelandic dasask (from the Old Norse word). Related: Dazed.


lassitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lassitude (14c.), from Latin lassitudinem (nominative lassitudo)
faintness, weariness, from lassus faint, tired, weary, from PIE *led- slow, weary (source also of
Old English l&aelig;t sluggish, slow; see late (adj.)), from root *le- to let go, slacken (see
lenient).


tired (adj.)

exhausted, fatigued, weary, early 15c., past participle adjective from tire (v.).


dull (v.)

c.1200, to grow weary, tire; of pointed or edged things from c.1400; of the senses from 1550s; from
dull (adj.). Related: Dulled; dulling.


unwearied (adj.)

mid-13c., from Old English ungewerigod, from un- (1) not + past participle of weary (v.).


jade (v.)

to weary, tire out, make dull, c.1600, from jade (n.2). Related: Jaded; jading.


heavy-handed (adj.)

also heavyhanded, 1630s, originally weary or clumsy; from heavy (adj.) + handed. Sense of
overbearing is first recorded 1883.


tedium (n.)

tediousness, 1660s, from Latin taedium weariness, irksomeness, disgust, related to taedet it is
wearisome, it excites loathing, and to taedere to weary, of uncertain origin. Possible cognates are
Old Church Slavonic te&#382;o, Lithuanian tingiu to be dull, be listless.


sad (adj.)

Old English s&aelig;d sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of,
from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;r, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High
German sat, German satt, Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, sated, full), from PIE *seto- (cognates: Latin
satis enough, sufficient, Greek hadros thick, bulky, Old Church Slavonic sytu, Lithuanian sotus
satiated, Old Irish saith satiety, sathach sated), from root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Sanskrit
a-sinvan insatiable).    Sense development passed through the meaning heavy, ponderous (i.e. full
mentally or physically), and weary, tired of before emerging c.1300 as unhappy. An alternative
course would be through the common Middle English sense of steadfast, firmly established, fixed (as
in sad-ware tough pewter vessels) and serious to grave. In the main modern sense, it replaced Old
English unrot, negative of rot cheerful, glad.    Meaning very bad is from 1690s. Slang sense of
inferior, pathetic is from 1899; sad sack is 1920s, popularized by World War II armed forces
(specifically by cartoon character invented by Sgt. George Baker, 1942, and published in U.S. Armed
Forces magazine Yank), probably a euphemistic shortening of common military slang phrase sad sack of
shit.


tucker (v.)

to tire, weary, 1833, New England slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps from tucked (past participle
of tuck (v.)), which had, in reference to dogs, a slang sense of exhausted, underfed. Especially
with out. Related: Tuckered; tuckering.


American dream

coined 1931 by James Truslow Adams (1878-1949), U.S. writer and popular historian (unrelated to the
Massachusetts Adamses), in Epic of America.    [The American Dream is] that dream of a land in which
life should be better and richer and fuller for everyone, with opportunity for each according to
ability or achievement. It is a difficult dream for the European upper classes to interpret
adequately, and too many of us ourselves have grown weary and mistrustful of it. It is not a dream
of motor cars and high wages merely, but a dream of social order in which each man and each woman
shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are innately capable, and be recognized
by others for what they are, regardless of the fortuitous circumstances of birth or position.
[Adams]    Others have used the term as they will.


mole (n.3)

breakwater, 1540s, from Middle French m&ocirc;le breakwater (16c.), ultimately from Latin moles
mass, massive structure, barrier, from PIE root *mo- to exert oneself (cognates: Greek molos effort,
molis hardly, scarcely; German m&#252;hen to tire, m&#252;de weary, tired; Russian majat' to
fatigue, exhaust, maja hard work).


indefatigable (adj.)

1580s (implied in indefatigably), from French indefatigable (15c.), from Latin indefatigabilis that
cannot be wearied, from in- not (see in- (1)) + defatigare to tire out, from de- utterly, down, away
+ fatigare to weary (see fatigue).


infatigable (adj.)

c.1500, from French infatigable (15c.), from Latin infatigabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + fatigabilis, from fatigare to weary (see fatigue).


fatigue (n.)

1660s, that which causes weariness, from French fatigue weariness, from fatiguer to tire, from Latin
fatigare, originally to cause to break down, later, to weary, fatigue, tire out, from pre-Latin adj.
*fati-agos driving to the point of breakdown, from Old Latin *fatis (of unknown origin, related to
adv. affatim sufficiently and to fatisci crack, split) + root of agere to drive (see act (n.)).
Meaning weariness from exertion is from 1719.


lax (adj.)

c.1400, loose (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus wide, loose, open, figuratively loose,
free, wide, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (cognates: Greek legein to leave off,
stop, lagos hare, literally with drooping ears, lagnos lustful, lascivious, lagaros slack, hollow,
shrunken; Latin languere to be faint, weary, languidis faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid). Of
rules, discipline, etc., attested from mid-15c.


air raid (n.)

1914, from air (n.1) + raid (n.); originally in reference to British attacks Sept. 22, 1914, on
Zeppelin bases at Cologne and D&uuml;sseldorf in World War I. The German word is Fliegerangriff
aviator-attack, and if Old English had survived into the 20th century our word instead might be
fleogendeongrype.    One didn't dare to inhale for fear of breathing it in. It was the sound of
eighteen hundred airplanes approaching Hamburg from the south at an unimaginable height. We had
already experienced two hundred or even more air raids, among them some very heavy ones, but this
was something completely new. And yet there was an immediate recognition: this was what everyone had
been waiting for, what had hung for months like a shadow over everything we did, making us weary. It
was the end. [Hans Erich Nossack, Der Untergang, 1942]


threat (n.)

Old English &thorn;reat crowd, troop, also oppression, coercion, menace, related to &thorn;reotan to
trouble, weary, from Proto-Germanic *thrautam (cognates: Dutch verdreiten, German verdrie&szlig;en
to vex), from PIE *treud- to push, press squeeze (cognates: Latin trudere to press, thrust, Old
Church Slavonic trudu oppression, Middle Irish trott quarrel, conflict, Middle Welsh cythrud
torture, torment, afflict). Sense of conditional declaration of hostile intention was in Old
English.


annoy (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French anuier, Old French enoiier, anuier to weary, vex, anger; be troublesome
or irksome to, from Late Latin inodiare make loathsome, from Latin (esse) in odio (it is to me)
hateful, ablative of odium hatred (see odium). Earliest form of the word in English was as a noun,
c.1200, feeling of irritation, displeasure, distaste. Related: Annoyed; annoying; annoyingly. Middle
English also had annoyful and annoyous (both late 14c.).


staunch (adj.)

early 15c., impervious to water, from Old French estanche firm, watertight, fem. of estanc tired,
exhausted, wearied, vanquished; water-tight; withered, dried (Modern French &#233;tanche), from
Vulgar Latin *stanticare (source also of Spanish estanco water-tight, Italian stanco exhausted,
weary), probably from Latin stans (genitive stantis), present participle of stare to stand, from PIE
root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of strong, substantial first recorded mid-15c.; of persons,
standing firm and true to one's principles from 1620s.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


cloy (v.)

weary by too much, fill to loathing, surfeit, 1520s, from Middle English cloyen hinder movement,
encumber (late 14c.), a shortening of accloyen (early 14c.), from Old French encloer to fasten with
a nail, grip, grasp, figuratively to hinder, check, stop, curb, from Late Latin inclavare drive a
nail into a horse's foot when shoeing, from Latin clavus a nail (see slot (n.2)).    Accloye is a
hurt that cometh of shooing, when a Smith driveth a nail in the quick, which make him to halt.
[Edward Topsell, The History of Four-footed Beasts, 1607]    The figurative meaning fill to a
satiety, overfill is attested for accloy from late 14c. Related: Cloyed; cloying.


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


road (n.)

Old English rad riding expedition, journey, hostile incursion, from Proto-Germanic *raido (cognates:
Old Frisian red ride, Old Saxon reda, Middle Dutch rede, Old High German reita foray, raid), from
PIE *reidh- to ride (see ride (v.)). Also related to raid (n.). In Middle English, a riding, a
journey; sense of open way for traveling between two places is first recorded 1590s. Meaning narrow
stretch of sheltered water is from early 14c. (as in Hampton Roads in Virginia).    Modern spelling
established 18c. In 19c. U.S. use, often meaning railroad. On the road travelling is from 1640s.
Road test (n.) is from 1906; as a verb from 1937. Road hog is attested from 1886; road rage is from
1988. Road map is from 1786; road trip is by 1950, originally of baseball teams. Old English had
radwerig weary of travelling.


sick (adj.)

unwell, Old English seoc ill, diseased, feeble, weak; corrupt; sad, troubled, deeply affected, from
Proto-Germanic *seukaz, of uncertain origin. The general Germanic word (Old Norse sjukr, Danish syg,
Old Saxon siok, Old Frisian siak, Middle Dutch siec, Dutch ziek, Old High German sioh, Gothic siuks
sick, ill), but in German and Dutch displaced by krank weak, slim, probably originally with a sense
of twisted, bent (see crank (n.)).    Restricted meaning having an inclination to vomit, affected
with nausea is from 1610s; sense of tired or weary (of something), disgusted from satiety is from
1590s; phrase sick and tired of is attested from 1783. Meaning mentally twisted in modern colloquial
use is from 1955, a revival of the word in this sense from 1550s (sense of spiritually or morally
corrupt was in Old English, which also had seocmod infirm of mind); sick joke is from 1958.


lazy (adj.)

1540s, laysy, of unknown origin. Replaced native slack, slothful, and idle as the main word
expressing the notion of averse to work. In 19c. thought to be from lay (v.) as tipsy from tip.
Skeat is responsible for the prevailing modern view that it probably comes from Low German, from a
source such as Middle Low German laisch weak, feeble, tired, modern Low German l&auml;&ouml;sig,
early modern Dutch leuzig, all of which may go back to the PIE root *(s)leg- slack. According to
Weekley, the -z- sound disqualifies a connection with French lass&eacute; tired or German lassig
lazy, weary, tired. A supposed dialectal meaning naught, bad, if it is the original sense, may tie
the word to Old Norse lasenn dilapidated, lasm&oslash;yrr decrepit, fragile, root of Icelandic las-
fur&eth;a ailing, las-leiki ailment. Lazy Susan is from 1917. Grose (Dictionary of the Vulgar
Tongue, 1788) has Lazy Man's Load: Lazy people frequently take up more than they can safely carry,
to save the trouble of coming a second time.


katzenjammer (n.)

1849, a hangover, American English colloquial, from German katzen, comb. form of katze cat (see cat
(n.)) + jammer distress, wailing (see yammer). Hence, any unpleasant reaction (1897).    Pleasure
can intoxicate, passion can inebriate, success can make you quite as drunk as champagne. The waking
from these several stages of delights will bring the same result--Katzenjammer. In English you would
call it reaction; but whole pages of English cannot express the sick, empty, weary, vacant feeling
which is so concisely contained within these four German syllables. [Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine,
August 1884]   Katzenjammer Kids spectacularly naughty children is from title of comic strip first
drawn by German-born U.S. comic strip artist Rudolph Dirks (1877-1968) in 1897 for the New York
Journal. It was temporarily de-Germanized during World War I:    THE SHENANIGAN KIDS is the new
American name for the original Katzenjammer Kids. Although the original name and idea were pure
Holland Dutch, some people may have had the mistaken impression that they were of Germanic origin,
and hence the change. It is the same splendid comic as in the past. [International Feature Service
advertisement in Editor &amp; Publisher, July 6, 1918]


