weird (adj.)

c.1400, having power to control fate, from wierd (n.), from Old English wyrd fate, chance, fortune;
destiny; the Fates, literally that which comes, from Proto-Germanic *wurthiz (cognates: Old Saxon
wurd, Old High German wurt fate, Old Norse ur&eth;r fate, one of the three Norns), from PIE *wert-
to turn, to wind, (cognates: German werden, Old English weor&eth;an to become), from root *wer- (3)
to turn, bend (see versus). For sense development from turning to becoming, compare phrase turn into
become.    The sense uncanny, supernatural developed from Middle English use of weird sisters for
the three fates or Norns (in Germanic mythology), the goddesses who controlled human destiny. They
were portrayed as odd or frightening in appearance, as in Macbeth (and especially in 18th and 19th
century productions of it), which led to the adjectival meaning odd-looking, uncanny (1815); odd,
strange, disturbingly different (1820). Related: Weirdly; weirdness.


weirdo (n.)

strange person, 1955, from weird. Compare earlier Scottish weirdie young man with long hair and a
beard (1894).


wyrd

see weird.


unearthly (adj.)

1610s, heavenly, sublime, from un- (1) not + earthly. Sense of ghostly, weird first recorded 1802.
Related: Unearthliness.


blimp (n.)

1916, of obscure origin, many claimants. One of the weird coinages of the airmen [Weekley]. Common
theory is that it is from designers' prototype nickname Type B-limp, in the sense of without
internal framework, as opposed to Type A-rigid; thus see limp (adj.).


gonzo (adj.)

1971, American English, in Hunter S. Thompson's phrase gonzo journalism. Thompson in 1972 said he
got it from editor Bill Cardosa and explained it as some Boston word for weird, bizarre. Probably
from Italian gonzo rude, sottish, perhaps from Spanish ganso and ultimately from the Germanic word
for goose.


wingnut (n.)

nut with flared sides for turning with the thumb and forefinger; so called for its shape. Meaning
weird person recorded by 1989, probably not from the literal sense but from the secondary sense of
nut, influenced perhaps by slang senses of wing in wing-ding wild party, originally fit, spasm
(1937). An earlier, British, sense of wingnut was person with large, protruding ears (1986).


fate (n.)

late 14c., from Latin fata, neuter plural of fatum prophetic declaration, oracle, prediction, thus
that which is ordained, destiny, fate, literally thing spoken (by the gods), from neuter past
participle of fari to speak, from PIE *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)).    The Latin sense evolution
is from sentence of the Gods (Greek theosphaton) to lot, portion (Greek moira, personified as a
goddess in Homer), also one of the three goddesses (Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos) who determined
the course of a human life. The native word was wyrd (see weird).


worth (adj.)

Old English weor&thorn; significant, valuable, of value; valued, appreciated, highly thought-of,
deserving, meriting; honorable, noble, of high rank; suitable for, proper, fit, capable, from Proto-
Germanic *werthaz toward, opposite, hence equivalent, worth (cognates: Old Frisian werth, Old Norse
ver&eth;r, Dutch waard, Old High German werd, German wert, Gothic wair&thorn;s worth, worthy),
perhaps a derivative of PIE *wert- to turn, wind, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Probably related to weird. Old Church Slavonic vredu, Lithuanian vertas worth are Germanic loan-
words. From c.1200 as equivalent to, of the value of, valued at; having importance equal to; equal
in power to.


surfing (n.)

1955, verbal noun from surf (v.). The surfing craze went nationwide in U.S. from California in 1963.
Surf-board is from 1826, originally in a Hawaiian and Polynesian context. Surf music attested from
1963.    It is highly amusing to a stranger to go out into the south part of this town, some day
when the sea is rolling in heavily over the reef, and to observe there the evolutions and rapid
career of a company of surf-players. The sport is so attractive and full of wild excitement to
Hawaiians, and withal so healthful, that I cannot but hope it will be many years before civilization
shall look it out of countenance, or make it disreputable to indulge in this manly, though it be
dangerous, exercise. [the Rev. Henry T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, New York, 1851]   <hr
/>   The basis of surfing music is a rock and roll bass beat figuration, coupled with a raunch-type
weird-sounding lead guitar plus wailing saxes. Surfing music has to sound untrained with a certain
rough flavor to appeal to the teenagers. [music publisher Murray Wilson, quoted in Billboard, June
29, 1963]


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


