well-bred (adj.)

1590s, from well (adv.) + bred.


bantam (n.)

1749, after Bantam, former Dutch residency in Java, from which the small domestic fowl were said to
have been first imported. Extension to small person is 1837. As a light weight class in boxing, it
is attested from 1884, probably from the birds, which are small but aggressive and bred for
fighting.


cad (n.)

1730, shortening of cadet (q.v.); originally used of servants, then (1831) of town boys by students
at British universities and public schools (though at Cambridge it meant snob). Meaning person
lacking in finer feelings is from 1838.A cad used to be a jumped-up member of the lower classes who
was guilty of behaving as if he didn't know that his lowly origin made him unfit for having sexual
relationships with well-bred women. [Anthony West, H.G. Wells: Aspects of a Life, 1984]


dachshund (n.)

1881, from German Dachshund (15c.), from Dachs (Old High German dahs, 11c.) badger (perhaps
literally builder; see texture) + Hund dog (see hound (n.)). Probably so called because the dogs
were used in badger hunts, their long, thin bodies bred to burrow into setts. French taisson,
Spanish texon, tejon, Italian tasso are Germanic loan words.


knothead (n.)

stupid person, by 1899, American English, from knot (n.) + head (n.). Joe Knothead is the name of a
character in an 1857 blackface satire publication. And a local history from Massachusetts published
in 1879 describes an old-time character known as knot-head because [d]uring the hottest days of
summer ... he worked bare-headed in the sun ....   Knothead also was used as a term in cattle and
sheep raising, defined in 1922 as a type of poorly bred, stunted northern cattle, about the size of
yearlings, but with heavy horns indicating that they are older. It turns up, however, in an 1849
petition to the Ohio Legislature, recommending a certain person for a court position, in part
because he is a knot-head, which the report of the petition notes is a term of praise for a judge
because they are asked to untangle knotty legal questions, but which phrase, it adds, is believed
not to be in use among gentlemen in the north part of the State. [Appendix to the Journal of the
Ohio House of Representatives, Session of 1848-9]


quarter (n.)

c.1300, one-fourth of anything; one of four parts or divisions of a thing; often in reference to the
four parts into which a slaughtered animal is cut, from Old French quartier, cartier (12c.), from
Latin quartarius fourth part, from quartus fourth (see quart). One of the earliest dated references
in English is to parts of the body as dismembered during execution (c.1300).    Used of the phases
of the moon from early 15c. The use of quarter of an hour is attested from mid-15c. In Middle
English quarter also meant one of the four divisions of a 12-hour night (late 14c.), and the quarter
of the night meant nine o'clock p.m. (early 14c.).    From late 14c. as one of the four quadrants of
the heavens; hence, from the notion of the winds, a side, a direction (c.1400). In heraldry from
mid-14c. as one of the four divisions of a shield or coat of arms. The word's connection with four
loosened in Middle English and by 15c. expressions such as six-quartered for six-sided are found.
Meaning region, locality, area, place is from c.1400. Meaning portion of a town (identified by the
class or race of people who live there) is first attested 1520s. For military sense, see quarters.
As a period of time in a football game, from 1911. Quarter horse, bred strong for racing on quarter-
mile tracks, first recorded 1834.    The coin (one fourth of a dollar) is peculiar to U.S., first
recorded 1783. But quarter could mean a farthing in Middle English (late 14c.), and compare British
quadrant a farthing (c.1600), and classical Latin quadrans, the name of a coin worth a quarter of an
as (the basic unit of Roman currency).   Quarter days (mid-15c.), designated as days when rents were
paid and contracts and leases began or expired, were, in England, Lady day (March 25), Midsummer day
(June 24), Michaelmas day (Sept. 29), and Christmas day (Dec. 25); in Scotland, keeping closer to
the pagan Celtic calendar, they were Candlemas (Feb. 2), Whitsunday (May 15), Lammas (Aug. 1), and
Martinmas (Nov. 11). Quarter in the sense period of three months; one of the four divisions of a
year is recorded from late 14c.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


vulgar (adj.)

late 14c., common, ordinary, from Latin vulgaris, volgaris of or pertaining to the common people,
common, vulgar, low, mean, from vulgus the common people, multitude, crowd, throng, perhaps from a
PIE root *wel- to crowd, throng (cognates: Sanskrit vargah division, group, Greek eilein to press,
throng, Middle Breton gwal'ch abundance, Welsh gwala sufficiency, enough) [not in Watkins]. Meaning
coarse, low, ill-bred is first recorded 1640s, probably from earlier use (with reference to people)
with meaning belonging to the ordinary class (1530). Related: Vulgarly.


Airedale

type of terrier, 1880, named for Airedale, a district in West Riding, Yorkshire.    Name registered
by Kennel Club (1886), for earlier Bingley (where first bred), or broken-haired terrier. [Weekley]


Herefordshire

Old English Herefordscir, from Hereford (958), literally ford suitable for the passage of an army.
Probably so-called in reference to the Roman road passing over the Wye River. Herford in Germany has
the same etymology. As the name for a type of cattle, first bred there, it is attested from 1789.


Lipizzan

1911, from Lipizza, home of the former Austrian Imperial Stud; term used to designate horses
originally bred there. The city is modern-day Lipica near Trieste in Slovenia (Lipizza is the
Italian form of the name).


thee (pron.)

Old English &thorn;e (accusative and dative singular of &thorn;u thou), from Proto-Germanic *theke
(cognates: Old Frisian thi, Middle Dutch di, Old High German dih, German dich, Old Norse &thorn;ik,
Norwegian deg, Gothic &thorn;uk), from PIE *tege-, accusative of root *tu-, second person singular
pronoun (see thou). The verb meaning to use the pronoun 'thee' to someone is recorded from 1662, in
connection with the rise of Quakerism.    In Middle English, people began to use plural forms in all
cases, at first as a sign of respect to superiors, then as a courtesy to equals. By the 1600s, the
singular forms had come to represent familiarity and lack of status, and fell from use except in the
case of a few dialects, notably in the north of England. People in Lancashire north of the
Rossendale Forest and Yorkshire formerly were noted for use of the singular second person pronouns
tha (nom.) and thee (acc.). For religious reasons (Christian equality of persons, but also justified
as grammatically correct), the Quakers also retained the familiar forms.    Thou and Thee was a sore
cut to proud flesh and them that sought self-honour, who, though they would say it to God and
Christ, could not endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and abused, and
sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words to some proud men, who would say, What! you
ill-bred clown, do you Thou me? as though Christian breeding consisted in saying You to one; which
is contrary to all their grammar and teaching books, by which they instructed their youth. [George
Fox's journal, 1661]   <hr />   While the Quakers originally adopted thee and thou on account of
their grammatical correctness, they soon fell into the careless habit of using thee, the objective,
instead of thou, the nominative. Common illustrations are: How does thee do? or Will thee, etc.
[George Fox Tucker, A Quaker Home, Boston, 1891]


Percheron (n.)

1875, from French Percheron, adjective formed from le Perche, region south of Normandy where horses
were bred that were strong, light, and fast.


Clydesdale

breed of heavy draught horses, 1786, so called because they were bred in the valley of the Clyde in
Scotland. The river name is perhaps literally cleansing, from a Celtic root akin to Latin cloaca
(see cloaca).


Guernsey

breed of cattle, 1834, from the Channel Island where it was bred; the island name is Viking. Like
neighboring Jersey, it was also taken as the name for a coarse, close-fitting vest of wool (1839),
and in Australia the word supplies many of the usages of jersey in U.S. The second element of the
name is Old Norse ey island; the first element uncertain, traditionally meaning green, but perhaps
rather representing a Viking personal name, such as Grani.


hoyden (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Dutch heiden rustic, uncivilized man, from Middle Dutch
heiden heathen (see heathen). Originally in English rude, boorish fellow; sense of ill-bred,
boisterous female first recorded 1670s.


dromedary (n.)

late 13c., from Old French dromedaire, from Late Latin dromedarius kind of camel, from Latin dromas
(genitive dromados), from Greek dromas kamelos running camel, from dromos a race course, from PIE
*drem-, from possible base *der- to run, walk, step (cognates: Sanskrit dramati runs, goes, Greek
dromas running, Middle High German tremen to rock, shake, sway). One-humped Arabian camels were bred
and trained for riding. An early variant was drumbledairy (1560s).


trash (n.)

late 14c., thing of little use or value, waste, refuse, dross, perhaps from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse tros rubbish, fallen leaves and twigs, Norwegian dialectal trask lumber, trash,
baggage, Swedish trasa rags, tatters), of unknown origin. Applied to ill-bred persons or groups from
1604 (Othello), and especially of poor whites in the U.S. South by 1831. Applied to domestic refuse
or garbage from 1906 (American English). Trash-can attested from 1914. To trash-talk someone or
something is by 1989.


brawn (n.)

late 13c., from Old French braon fleshy or muscular part, buttock, from Frankish *brado ham, roast
or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- (cognates: Old High German brato tender
meat, German Braten roast, Old Norse bra&eth; raw meat, Old English br&aelig;d flesh), from PIE
*bhre- burn, heat, from root *bhreue- to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn (see brew (v.)). The
original sense is piece of meat suitable for roasting. The specific sense 'boar's flesh' is
exclusively of English development, and characteristic of English habits [OED].


breed (v.)

Old English bredan bring young to birth, carry, also cherish, keep warm, from West Germanic *brodjan
(cognates: Old High German bruoten, German br&uuml;ten to brood, hatch), from *brod- fetus,
hatchling, from PIE *bhreue- burn, heat (see brood (n.)). Original notion of the word was
incubation, warming to hatch. Sense of grow up, be reared (in a clan, etc.) is late 14c. Related:
Bred; breeding.


broad (adj.)

Old English brad broad, flat, open, extended, from Proto-Germanic *braithaz (cognates: Old Frisian
bred, Old Norse brei&eth;r, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brou&thorn;s), of unknown origin. Not
found outside Germanic languages. No clear distinction in sense from wide. Related: Broadly. Broad-
brim as a style of hat (1680s, broad-brimmed) in 18c.-19c. suggested Quaker male from their
characteristic attire.


tyke (n.)

late 14c., cur, mongrel, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tik bitch, from Proto-Germanic
*tikk- (cognates: Middle Low German tike). Also applied in Middle English to a low-bred or lazy man.
The meaning child is from 1902, though the word was used in playful reproof from 1894. As a nickname
for a Yorkshireman, from c.1700; Perhaps originally opprobrious; but now accepted and owned [OED].


courteous (adj.)

mid-14c., earlier curteis (c.1300), from Old French curteis (Modern French courtois) having courtly
bearing or manners, from curt court (see court (n.)) + -eis, from Latin -ensis.    Rare before
c.1500. In feudal society, also denoting a man of good education (hence the name Curtis). Medieval
courts were associated with good behavior and also beauty; compare German h&uuml;bsch beautiful,
from Middle High German h&uuml;besch beautiful, originally courteous, well-bred, from Old Franconian
hofesch, from hof court. Related: Courteously (mid-14c., kurteis-liche).


mule (n.1)

offspring of donkey and horse, from Old English mul, Old French mul mule, hinny (12c., fem. mule),
both from Latin mulus (fem. mula) a mule, probably from a pre-Latin Mediterranean language.The mule
combines the strength of the horse with the endurance and surefootedness of the ass, and is
extensively bred for certain employments for which it is more suited than either; it is ordinarily
incapable of procreation. With no good grounds, the mule is a proverbial type of obstinacy.
[OED]Properly, the offspring of a he-ass and a mare; that of a she-ass and a stallion is technically
a hinny. Used allusively of hybrids and things of mixed nature. As a type of spinning machine,
attested from 1797 (so called because a hybrid of distinct warp and woof machines). Meaning
obstinate, stupid, or stubborn person is from 1470s; that of narcotics smuggler or courier first
attested 1935.


underbred (adj.)

of inferior breeding, vulgar, 1640s, from under + past participle of breed (v.). Of animals, not
pure bred, attested from 1890.


bratwurst (n.)

1911, from German Bratwurst, from wurst + Br&auml;t lean meat, finely chipped calf or swine meat,
from Old High German brato (12c.), from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- roast flesh (source also of Old
English br&aelig;de meat), from PIE *bhreue- (see brawn). German folk etymology derives it from
braten to roast, bake, broil, grill; more likely both are from the same ancient source.


civilly (adv.)

1550s, with reference to citizenship or civil matters, also in a well-bred manner; from civil + -ly
(2).


fleshpot (n.)

from flesh (n.) + pot (n.1); literally pot in which flesh is boiled, hence luxuries regarded with
envy, especially in fleshpots of Egypt, from Exodus xvi:3:  Whan we sat by ye Flesh pottes, and had
bred ynough to eate. [Coverdale translation, 1535]


bred

past tense and past participle of breed (v.).


inbred (adj.)

1590s, native, also inherent by nature, from in + bred. The genetic sense is from 1892 (also see
inbreeding).


Weimaraner (n.)

dog breed, 1943, from Weimar, german city, + German suffix -aner indicating of this place.
Originally bred as a hunting dog in the Weimar region.


purebred (adj.)

1868, from pure + bred.


standard (adj.)

1620s, serving as a standard, from standard (adj.). Earlier it meant upright (1530s). Standard-bred
bred up to some agreed-upon standard of excellence is from 1888.


