welt (n.)

early 15c., a shoemaker's term, perhaps related to Middle English welten to overturn, roll over
(c.1300), from Old Norse velta to roll (related to welter (v.)). Meaning ridge on the skin from a
wound is first recorded 1800.


weltanschauung (n.)

1868 (William James), from German Weltanschauung, from welt world (see world) + anschauung
perception (related to English show).


weltschmerz (n.)

pessimism about life, 1872 (1863 as a German word in English), from German Weltschmerz, coined 1810
by Jean Paul Richter, from Welt world (see world) + Schmerz pain (see smart (n.)). Popularized in
German by Heine.


welterweight (n.)

1831, heavyweight horseman, later boxer or wrestler of a certain weight (1896), from earlier welter
heavyweight horseman or boxer (1804), possibly from welt (v.) beat severely (c.1400).    ... but at
the end of the first German mile, Nature gave way, and this excellent mare was obliged to knock
under to the extraordinary exertions she had made, and to the welter weight she carried, upwards of
13 stone. [The Sporting Magazine, September 1831]


wheal (n.)

mark made on the skin by a whip, 1808, perhaps an alteration of wale, possibly by confusion with
weal welt, and obsolete wheal pimple, pustule (mid-15c.), from Old English verb hwelian to form pus,
bring to a head.


opium (n.)

late 14c., from Latin opium, from Greek opion poppy juice, poppy, diminutive of opos vegetable
juice.Die Religion ist der Seufzer der bedr&auml;ngten Kreatur, das Gem&uuml;th einer herzlosen
Welt, wie sie der Geist geistloser Zust&auml;nde ist. Sie ist das Opium des Volks. [Karl Marx, Zur
Kritik der Hegel'schen Rechts-Philosophie, in Deutsch-Franz&ouml;sische Jahrb&uuml;cher, February,
1844]  The British Opium War against China lasted from 1839-42; the name is attested from 1841.


wold (n.)

Old English wald (Anglian), weald (West Saxon, Kentish) forest, wooded upland, from Proto-Germanic
*walthuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian wald, Middle Dutch woude, wold, Dutch woud, Middle Low
German walde, Old High German wald, German Wald forest, Swedish vall pasture, Old Norse v&ouml;llr
soil, field, meadow), from PIE root *welt- woods; wild. The sense development from forested upland
to rolling open country (c.1200) perhaps is from Scandinavian influence, or a testimony to the
historical deforestation of Britain. Not current since mid-16c.; survives mainly in place names
(such as Cotswold).


wild (adj.)

Old English wilde in the natural state, uncultivated, untamed, undomesticated, uncontrolled, from
Proto-Germanic *wilthja- (cognates: Old Saxon wildi, Old Norse villr, Old Frisian wilde, Dutch wild,
Old High German wildi, German wild, Gothic wil&thorn;eis wild, German Wild (n.) game), from PIE root
*welt- woodlands; wild (see wold).    Ursula ... hath bin at all the Salsbury rasis, dancing like
wild with Mr Clarks. [letter, 1674]  Meaning sexually dissolute, loose is attested from mid-13c.
Meaning distracted with excitement or emotion, crazy is from 1590s. U.S. slang sense of exciting,
excellent is recorded from 1955. As an adverb from 1540s. Baseball wild pitch is recorded from 1867.
Wildest dreams attested from 1717. Wild West in a U.S. context recorded by 1826. Wild Turkey brand
of whiskey (Austin Nichols Co.) in use from 1942.


world (n.)

Old English woruld, worold human existence, the affairs of life, also a long period of time, also
the human race, mankind, humanity, a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon
werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt, German Welt),
with a literal sense of age of man, from Proto-Germanic *wer man (Old English wer, still in
werewolf; see virile) + *ald age (see old).    Originally life on earth, this world (as opposed to
the afterlife), sense extended to the known world, then to the physical world in the broadest sense,
the universe (c.1200). In Old English gospels, the commonest word for the physical world, was
Middangeard (Old Norse Midgard), literally the middle enclosure (see yard (n.1)), which is rooted in
Germanic cosmology. Greek kosmos in its ecclesiastical sense of world of people sometimes was
rendered in Gothic as manase&thorn;s, literally seed of man. The usual Old Norse word was heimr,
literally abode (see home). Words for world in some other Indo-European languages derive from the
root for bottom, foundation (such as Irish domun, Old Church Slavonic duno, related to English
deep); the Lithuanian word is pasaulis, from pa- under + saule sun.    Original sense in world
without end, translating Latin saecula saeculorum, and in worldly. Latin saeculum can mean both age
and world, as can Greek aion. Meaning a great quantity or number is from 1580s. Out of this world
surpassing, marvelous is from 1928; earlier it meant dead. World Cup is by 1951; U.S. baseball World
Series is by 1893 (originally often World's Series). World power in the geopolitical sense first
recorded 1900. World-class is attested from 1950, originally of Olympic athletes.


