whiffle (v.)

flicker or flutter as if blown by the wind, 1660s; see whiff. The noun meaning something light or
insignificant (1670s) is preserved in whiffle-ball (1931).


whiff (n.)

13c., weffe foul scent or odor, of imitative origin. Modern form became popular late 16c. with
tobacco smoking, probably influenced by whiffle blow in gusts or puffs (1560s). The verb in the
baseball slang sense to swing at a ball and miss first recorded 1913.


quiff (n.)

curl or lock of hair over the forehead, 1890, originally a style among soldiers, of unknown origin.
Perhaps connected with quiff a puff or whiff of tobacco smoke (1831, originally Southern U.S.), held
to be a variant of whiff (n.).


solon (n.)

legislator, 1620s, from Greek Solon, name of early lawgiver of Athens, one of the seven sages.
Often, especially in U.S., applied (with perhaps a whiff of sarcasm) by journalists to Congressmen,
township supervisors, etc. It also is a useful short headline word.


bippy (n.)

by 1968, buttocks, ass, U.S. slang, the kind of thing that once sounded naughty on Laugh-In (and
briefly popularized by that program). As it often was used with you bet your ... it may be nonsense
chosen for alliteration, but there may be some whiff of bipedal in it.


Wiffle

hollow, perforated plastic ball, registered trademark name (The Wiffle Ball Inc., Shelton,
Connecticut, U.S.), claiming use from 1954. According to the company, designed in 1953 by David N.
Mullany in response to a lack of field space and numerous broken windows by his baseball-playing
son, the name based on whiff (q.v.), baseball slang for a missed swing.


grapeshot (n.)

also grape-shot, 1747, from grape + shot (n.). So called for its appearance. The whiff of grapeshot
popularized in English from 1837, from Carlyle's history of the French Revolution (in which it was a
chapter title).


ambergris (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French ambre gris gray amber (see amber), a wax-like substance of ashy
colour, found floating in tropical seas, a morbid secretion from the intestines of the sperm-whale.
Used in perfumery, and formerly in cookery [OED]. Its origin was a mystery in Johnson's day, and he
records nine different theories. King Charles II's favorite dish was said to be eggs and ambergris
[Macauley, History of England]. French gris is from Frankish *gris or some other Germanic source
(cognates: Dutch grijs, Old High German gris; see gray). Praise is like ambergris; a little whiff of
it, by snatches, is very agreeable; but when a man holds a whole lump of it to his nose, it is a
stink and strikes you down. [Pope, c.1720]


