whimsical (adj.)

1650s, from whimsy + -ical. Related: Whimsically.


humbug (n.)

1751, student slang, trick, jest, hoax, deception, also as a verb, of unknown origin. A vogue word
of the early 1750s; its origin was a subject of much whimsical speculation even then.


eccentric (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval Latin eccentricus (noun and
adjective; see eccentric (n.)). Figurative sense of odd, whimsical first recorded 1620s.


whimwham (n.)

whimsical device, trifle, 1520s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Old Norse
hvima to let the eyes wander, Norwegian kvima to flutter), or else an arbitrary native formation
(compare flim-flam).


kempt (adj.)

well-combed, neat, late 14c., from past tense of dialectal kemb, from Old English cemdan (see
unkempt). A rare word after c.1500; any modern use probably is a whimsical back-formation from
unkempt.


capricious (adj.)

1590s, from French capricieux whimsical (16c.), from Italian capriccioso, from capriccio (see
caprice). Related: Capriciously; capriciousness.


crotchet (n.)

late 14c., crocket, later small hook (early 15c.), from Old French crochet (pronounced crotchet)
hook (see crochet). As a surgical instrument, from 1750. Figurative use in musical notation is from
mid-15c., from the shape of the notes. Meaning whimsical fancy is from 1570s; perhaps from the same
mechanical image in crank; but other authorities link this sense to the musical notation one.


verve (n.)

1690s, special talent in writing, enthusiasm in what pertains to art and literature, from French
verve enthusiasm (especially pertaining to the arts), in Old French caprice, odd humor, proverb,
saying; messenger's report (12c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *verva, from Latin verba (whimsical)
words, plural of verbum word (see verb). Meaning mental vigor is first recorded 1803.


fantasy (n.)

early 14c., illusory appearance, from Old French fantaisie (14c.) vision, imagination, from Latin
phantasia, from Greek phantasia appearance, image, perception, imagination, from phantazesthai
picture to oneself, from phantos visible, from phainesthai appear, in late Greek to imagine, have
visions, related to phaos, phos light, phainein to show, to bring to light (see phantasm). Sense of
whimsical notion, illusion is pre-1400, followed by that of imagination, which is first attested
1530s. Sense of day-dream based on desires is from 1926.


eccentric (n.)

early 15c., eccentric circle or orbit, originally a term in Ptolemaic astronomy, circle or orbit not
having the Earth precisely at its center, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval
Latin eccentricus (noun and adjective), from Greek ekkentros out of the center (as opposed to
concentric), from ek out (see ex-) + kentron center (see center (n.)). Meaning odd or whimsical
person attested by 1824.    June 4 [1800].--Died in the streets in Newcastle, William Barron, an
eccentric, well known for many years by the name of   Billy Pea-pudding. [John Sykes, Local Records,
or Historical Register of Remarkable Events which have Occurred Exclusively in the Counties of
Durham and Northumberland, Town and County of Newcastle Upon Tyne, and Berwick Upon Tweed,
Newcastle, 1824]


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


boy (n.)

mid-13c., boie servant, commoner, knave, boy, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie one
fettered, from Vulgar Latin *imboiare, from Latin boia leg iron, yoke, leather collar, from Greek
boeiai dorai ox hides. (Words for boy double as servant, attendant across the Indo-European map --
compare Italian ragazzo, French gar&ccedil;on, Greek pais, Middle English knave, Old Church Slavonic
otroku -- and often it is difficult to say which meaning came first.)    But it also appears to be
identical with East Frisian boi young gentleman, and perhaps with Dutch boef knave, from Middle
Dutch boeve, perhaps from Middle Low German buobe. This suggests a gradational relationship to babe.
For a different conjecture:    In Old English, only the proper name Boia has been recorded. ME boi
meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate
1400. ModE boy looks like a semantic blend of an onomatopoeic word for an evil spirit (*boi) and a
baby word for 'brother' (*bo). [Liberman]   <hr />   A noticable number of the modern words for
'boy', 'girl', and 'child' were originally colloquial nicknames, derogatory or whimsical, in part
endearing, and finally commonplace. These, as is natural, are of the most diverse, and in part
obscure, origin. [Buck]    Used slightingly of young men in Middle English; meaning male negro slave
or Asian personal servant of any age attested from c.1600. Exclamation oh, boy attested from 1892.


