whine (n.)

1630s, from whine (v.).


whine (v.)

Old English hwinan to whiz, hiss, or whistle through the air (only of arrows), also hwinsian to
whine (of dogs), ultimately of imitative origin (compare Old Norse hvina to whiz, German wiehern to
neigh). Meaning to complain in a feeble way is first recorded 1520s. Related: Whined; whining.


whiney (adj.)

also whiny, from whine + -y (2).


whinner (v.)

to whine feebly, c.1700, frequentative of whine. Related: Whinnered; whinnering.


mumps (n.)

type of contagious disease, c.1600, from plural of mump a grimace (1590s), originally a verb, to
whine like a beggar (1580s), from Dutch mompen to cheat, deceive, originally probably to mumble,
whine, of imitative origin. The infectious disease probably so called in reference to swelling of
the salivary glands of the face and/or to painful difficulty swallowing. Mumps also was used from
17c. to mean a fit of melancholy.


whinge (v.)

to complain peevishly, British, informal or dialectal, ultimately from the northern form of Old
English hwinsian, from Proto-Germanic *hwinison (cognates: Old High German winison, German winseln),
from root of Old English hwinan to whine (see whine (v.)). Related: Whinged; whinging.


whinny (v.)

1520s, probably related to whine and ultimately imitative (compare Latin hinnire).


kvetch (v.)

to complain, whine, 1953 (implied in kvetching), from Yiddish kvetshn, literally squeeze, press,
from German quetsche crusher, presser. As a noun, from 1936 as a term of abuse for a person.


jangle (v.)

c.1300, jangeln, to talk excessively, chatter, talk idly, from Old French jangler to chatter,
gossip, bawl, argue noisily (12c.), perhaps from Frankish *jangelon to jeer or some other Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch jangelen to whine). Meaning make harsh noise is first recorded late
15c. Related: Jangled; jangling.


grin (v.)

Old English grennian show the teeth (in pain or anger), common Germanic (cognates: Old Norse grenja
to howl, grina to grin; Dutch grienen to whine; German greinen to cry), from PIE root *ghrei- be
open. Sense of bare the teeth in a broad smile is late 15c., perhaps via the notion of forced or
unnatural smile. Related: Grinned; grinning.


poor (adj.)

c.1200, lacking money or resources, destitute; needy, indigent; small, scanty, from Old French povre
poor, wretched, dispossessed; inadequate; weak, thin (Modern French pauvre), from Latin pauper poor,
not wealthy, from pre-Latin *pau-paros producing little; getting little, a compound from the roots
of paucus little (see paucity) and parare to produce, bring forth (see pare).    Replaced Old
English earm. Figuratively from early 14c. Meaning of inferior quality is from c.1300. Of inhabited
places from c.1300; of soil, etc., from late 14c. The poor boy sandwich, made of simple but filling
ingredients, was invented and named in New Orleans in 1921. To poor mouth deny one's advantages is
from 1965 (to make a poor mouth whine is Scottish dialect from 1822). Slang poor man's ________ the
cheaper alternative to _______, is from 1854.


