wholesome (adj.)

c.1200, of benefit to the soul, from whole (adj.) in the healthy sense + -some (1). Physical sense
first attested late 14c. Related: Wholesomely; wholesomeness. Old English had halwende.


crunchy (adj.)

1892, from crunch + -y (2). Student slang sense of annoyingly intense about health or environmental
issues is by 1990, short for crunchy granola (considered as natural and wholesome); not entirely
pejorative at first. Related: Crunchiness.


healthful (adj.)

late 14c., wholesome, curative, saving, from health + -ful. Related: Healthfully; healthfulness.


unwholesome (adj.)

c.1200, from un- (1) not + wholesome (adj.). Similar formation in Flemish onheylsaem, German
unheilsam, Old Norse uheilsamr.


healthy (adj.)

1550s, from health + -y (2). Slightly earlier in the same sense was healthsome (1530s). Related:
Healthiness.    It is wrong to say that certain articles of food are healthy or unhealthy. Wholesome
and unwholesome are the right words. A pig may be healthy or unhealthy while alive; but after he is
killed and becomes pork, he can enjoy no health, and suffer no sickness. [Eliza Leslie, Miss
Leslie's Behaviour Book, Philadelphia, 1839]


horse (v.)

Old English horsian to provide with a horse or horses, from horse (n.). Related: Horsed; horsing.
Sense of to play excessive jokes on is by 1893, mostly in formation horse around (1928), perhaps
from horseplay.    [A] favorite pastime for many men is to horse or guy a friend who has shown
himself susceptible to ridicule or fun making. Horsing is extremely wholesome mental discipline for
over sensitive or super-conceited young men. Horsing always implies a joke at another's expense. As
to how it came into use there is no satisfactory theory to offer. [Yale Literary Magazine, December
1893]


sweet (adj.)

Old English swete pleasing to the senses, mind or feelings; having a pleasant disposition, from
Proto-Germanic *swotja- (cognates: Old Saxon swoti, Old Frisian swet, Swedish s&ouml;t, Danish
s&oslash;d, Middle Dutch soete, Dutch zoet, Old High German swuozi, German s&uuml;&szlig;), from PIE
root *swad- sweet, pleasant (Sanskrit svadus sweet; Greek hedys sweet, pleasant, agreeable, hedone
pleasure; Latin suavis pleasant (not especially of taste), suadere to advise, properly to make
something pleasant to). Words for sweet in Indo-European languages typically are used for other
sense as well and in general for pleasing.    Then come kiss me, sweet-and-twenty!   Youth's a stuff
will not endure.  [Twelfth Night]     Also being in a sound or wholesome state (mid-13c.), and, of
water, fresh, not salt (late Old English). As an intensifier from 1958. Sweet in bed (c.1300) was
the equivalent of modern good in bed. To be sweet on someone is first recorded 1690s. Sweet sixteen
first recorded 1767. Sweet dreams as a parting to one going to sleep is attested from 1898, short
for sweet dreams to you, etc. Sweet-and-sour in cookery is from 1723 and not originally of oriental
food. Sweet nothings sentimental trivialities is from 1900. Sweet spot is from 1976, first in
reference to tennis rackets. Sweet corn is from 1640s.


