willful (adj.)

also wilful, c.1200, strong-willed, usually in a bad sense, obstinate, unreasonable, from will (n.)
+ -ful. From late 14c. as eager (to do something). Mid-14c., of actions, done on purpose,
intentional, due to one's own will. Related: Willfullness.


willfully (adv.)

also wilfully, late Old English wilfullice of one's own free will, voluntarily; see willful + -ly
(2). Mid-14c. as deliberately, knowingly. Bad sense of on purpose is attested from late 14c.


vandal (n.)

1660s, willful destroyer of what is beautiful or venerable, from Vandals, name of the Germanic tribe
that sacked Rome in 455 under Genseric, from Latin Vandalus (plural Vandali), from the tribe's name
for itself (Old English Wendlas), perhaps from Proto-Germanic *wandljaz wanderer. The literal
historical sense in English is recorded from 1550s.    There does not seem to be in the story of the
capture of Rome by the Vandals any justification for the charge of willful and objectless
destruction of public buildings which is implied in the word 'vandalism.' It is probable that this
charge grew out of the fierce persecution which was carried on by [the Vandal king] Gaiseric and his
son against the Catholic Christians, and which is the darkest stain on their characters.
[Encyclopaedia Britannica, 13th ed., 1926]


wilful (adj.)

British English spelling of willful. Related: Wilfully; wilfulness.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


