wisp (n.)

early 14c., handful or bundle of hay, grass, etc., used for burning or cleaning or as a cushion;
perhaps from an unrecorded Old English word, cognate with Norwegian and Swedish visp wisp, of
unknown origin; sometimes said to be connected with whisk or with Middle Low German and Middle Dutch
wispel a measure of grain. Meaning thin, filmy portion first attested 1836.


wispy (adj.)

1717, from wisp + -y (2). Related: Wispiness.


will-o&#039;-the-wisp (n.)

1660s, earlier Will with the wisp (c.1600), from the masc. proper name Will + wisp bundle of hay or
straw used as a torch. Compare Jack o'lantern.


whisk (n.)

late 14c., quick stroke, sweeping movement, probably from Old Norse visk wisp of hay, something to
sweep with, from Proto-Germanic *wisk- move quickly (cognates: Danish visk broom, Middle Dutch
wisch, Dutch wis, Old High German wisc, German wisch wisp, brush), from PIE root *weis- to turn,
twist (cognates: Sanskrit veskah noose, Czech vechet a wisp of straw, Old English wiscian to plait,
weoxian to clean with a whisk or brush). Unetymological spelling with wh- is from 1570s. Meaning
implement for beating eggs, etc. first recorded 1660s.


ignis fatuus (n.)

will o' the wisp, jack-a-lantern, 1560s, from Medieval Latin, literally foolish fire; see igneous +
fatuous.


Jack o&#039;lantern (n.)

also jack-o-lantern, 1660s, a local name for a will-o-the-wisp (Latin ignis fatuus), mainly attested
in East Anglia but also in southwestern England. The extension to carved pumpkins is attested by
1834, American English.


dot (n.)

Old English dott speck, head of a boil, perhaps related to Norwegian dot lump, small knot, Dutch dot
knot, small bunch, wisp, Old High German tutta nipple; ultimate origin unclear.    Known from a
single source c.1000; the word reappeared with modern meaning mark c.1530; not common until 18c.
Morse telegraph sense is from 1838. On the dot punctual is 1909, in reference to a clock dial face.
Dot-matrix first attested 1975.


toilet (n.)

1530s, cover or bag for clothes, from Middle French toilette a cloth, bag for clothes, diminutive of
toile cloth, net (see toil (n.2)). Sense evolution in English (mostly following French uses) is to
act or process of dressing (1680s); then a dressing room (1819), especially one with a lavatory
attached; then lavatory or porcelain plumbing fixture (1895), an American euphemistic use. Toilet
paper is attested from 1884 (the Middle English equivalent was arse-wisp). Toilet training is
recorded from 1940.


spook (n.)

1801, spectre, apparition, ghost, from Dutch spook, from Middle Dutch spooc spook, ghost, from a
common Germanic source (German Spuk ghost, apparition, Middle Low German spok spook, Swedish spok
scarecrow, Norwegian spjok ghost, specter, Danish sp&oslash;g joke), of unknown origin. According to
Klein's sources, possible outside connections include Lettish spigana dragon, witch, spiganis will
o' the wisp, Lithuanian spingu, spingeti to shine, Old Prussian spanksti spark.    Meaning
undercover agent is attested from 1942. The derogatory racial sense of black person is attested from
1940s, perhaps from notion of dark skin being difficult to see at night. Black pilots trained at
Tuskegee Institute during World War II called themselves the Spookwaffe.


