withdraw (v.)

early 13c. (transitive), to take back, from with away + drawen to draw, possibly a loan-translation
of Latin retrahere to retract. Intransitive sense from mid-13c. Sense of to remove oneself is
recorded from c.1300. Related: Withdrawn; withdrawing.


Thalidomide (n.)

1958, from phthalimidoglutarimide, based on abbreviated form of naphthalene; a morning-sickness drug
responsible for severe birth defects in Europe from 1956 to 1961, when it was withdrawn. It never
was approved for use in America thanks to the efforts of Dr. Helen Brooke Taussig (1898-1986).
Thalidomide baby is attested from 1962.


secret (n.)

late 14c., from Latin secretus set apart, withdrawn; hidden, concealed, private, past participle of
secernere to set apart, part, divide; exclude, from se- without, apart, properly on one's own (see
se-) + cernere separate (see crisis).    As an adjective from late 14c., from French secret,
adjective use of noun. Open secret is from 1828. Secret agent first recorded 1715; secret service is
from 1737; secret weapon is from 1936.


redoubt (n.)

also redout, small, enclosed military work, c.1600, from French redoute (17c.), from Italian
ridotto, earlier ridotta, place of retreat, from Medieval Latin reductus place of refuge, retreat,
noun use of past participle of reducere to lead or bring back (see reduce). The -b- was added by
influence of unrelated English redoubt (v.) to dread, fear (see redoubtable). As an adjective, Latin
reductus meant withdrawn, retired; remote, distant.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


