withstand (v.)

Old English wi&eth;standan resist, oppose, from wi&eth; against (see with) + standan to stand (see
stand (v.)); perhaps a loan-translation of Latin resistere to resist (see resist). Similar formation
in Old Norse vi&eth;standa, Old Frisian withstonda, Old High German widarstan, German widerstehen.
In 14c. and early 15c., withsit was in use with the same meaning. Related: Withstood; withstanding.


contrast (v.)

1690s, from French contraster (Old French contrester), modified by or from Italian contrastare stand
out against, strive, contend, from Vulgar Latin *contrastare to withstand, from Latin contra against
(see contra) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Middle English had
contrest to fight against, to withstand, which became extinct. Modern word re-introduced as an art
term. Related: Contrasted; contrasting; contrastive.


notwithstanding (prep.)

late 14c., notwi&thorn;stondynge, from not + present participle of the verb withstand. A loan-
translation of Medieval Latin non obstante being no hindrance, from ablative of obstans, present
participle of obstare stand opposite to (see obstacle). As an adverb and as a conjunction from early
15c.


resist (v.)

late 14c., from Old French resister hold out against (14c.), from Latin resistere to make a stand
against, oppose; to stand back; withstand, from re- against (see re-) + sistere take a stand, stand
firm (see assist). Related: Resisted; resisting.


with (prep.)

Old English wi&eth; against, opposite, from, toward, by, near, a shortened form related to
wi&eth;er, from Proto-Germanic *withro- against (cognates: Old Saxon withar against, Old Norse
vi&eth;r against, with, toward, at, Middle Dutch, Dutch weder, Dutch weer again, Gothic wi&thorn;ra
against, opposite), from PIE *wi-tero-, literally more apart, suffixed form of root *wi- separation
(cognates: Sanskrit vi, Avestan vi- asunder, Sanskrit vitaram further, farther, Old Church Slavonic
vutoru other, second).    Sense shifted in Middle English to denote association, combination, and
union, partly by influence of Old Norse vidh, and also perhaps by Latin cum with (as in pugnare cum
fight with). In this sense, it replaced Old English mid with, which survives only as a prefix (as in
midwife). Original sense of against, in opposition is retained in compounds such as withhold,
withdraw, withstand. Often treated as a conjunction by ungrammatical writers and used where and
would be correct. First record of with child pregnant is recorded from c.1200. With it cool is black
slang, recorded by 1931. French avec with was originally avoc, from Vulgar Latin *abhoc, from apud
hoc, literally with this.


