wither (v.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English wydderen dry up, shrivel (late 14c.), intransitive, apparently a
differentiated and special use of wederen to expose to weather (see weather (v.)). Compare German
verwittern to become weather-beaten, from Witter weather. Transitive sense from 1550s. Related:
Withered; withering; witheringly.


wizen (v.)

Old English wisnian, weosnian to wither, dry up, waste away, from Proto-Germanic *wisnon (cognates:
Old Norse visna to wither, Old High German wesanen to dry up, shrivel, wither; German verwesen to
decay, rot), from PIE root *wei- (2) to wither. Related: Wizened.


marcescent (adj.)

withering, 1727, from Latin marcescentem (nominative marcescens), present participle of marcescere
to wither, languish, droop, decay, pine away, inchoative of marcere to wither, droop, be faint, from
PIE root *merk- to decay.


sear (v.)

Old English searian (intransitive) dry up, to wither, from Proto-Germanic *saurajan (cognates:
Middle Dutch soor dry, Old High German soren become dry), from root of sear dried up, withered (see
sere). Meaning cause to wither is from early 15c. Meaning to brand, to burn by hot iron is recorded
from c.1400, originally especially of cauterizing wounds; figurative use is from 1580s. Related:
Seared; searing.


wilt (v.)

1690s, to fade, droop, wither, probably an alteration of welk to wilt, probably from Middle Dutch or
Middle Low German welken to wither, cognate with Old High German irwelhen become soft, from Proto-
Germanic *welk-, from PIE root *welg- wet (see welkin). Transitive sense of cause to fade or droop
is from 1809. Related: Wilted; wilting.


immarcessible (adj.)

unfading, imperishable, 1540s, from Late Latin immarcessabilis from assimilated form of in- not (see
in- (1)) + marcessare to wither, pine away.


marasmus (n.)

wasting away of the body, 1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek marasmos a wasting away, withering, decay,
from marainein to quench, weaken, wither, from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid). Maras
(n.) evidently in the same sense is attested from mid-15c. Related: Marasmic.


sclero-

before vowels scler-, word-forming element meaning hard, from Latinized form of Greek sklero-, comb.
form of skleros hard, related to skellein to dry up, parch, from PIE *skle-ro-, from root *skele- to
parch, wither.


fade (v.)

early 14c., lose brightness, grow pale, from Old French fader become weak, wilt, wither, from adj.
fade pale, weak, insipid (12c.), probably from Vulgar Latin *fatidus, some sort of blending of Latin
fatuus silly, tasteless + vapidus flat, flavorless. Related: Faded; fading. As a noun, from c.1300.


Parnassus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Parnassos, mountain in central Greece, sacred to Apollo and the
Muses, thus symbolic of poetry. Room writes that the name is from Hittite parna abode. Related:
Parnassian.    Various kinds of literary fame seem destined to various measures of duration. Some
spread into exuberance with a very speedy growth, but soon wither and decay; some rise more slowly,
but last long. Parnassus has its flowers of transient fragrance, as well as its oaks of towering
height, and its laurels of eternal verdure. [Samuel Johnson, The Rambler, March 23, 1751]


mourn (v.)

Old English murnan to mourn, bemoan, long after, also be anxious about, be careful (class III strong
verb; past tense mearn, past participle murnen), from Proto-Germanic *murnan to remember sorrowfully
(cognates: Old Saxon mornon, Old High German mornen, Gothic maurnan to mourn, Old Norse morna to
pine away), probably from PIE root *(s)mer- to remember (see memory); or, if the Old Norse sense is
the base one, from *mer- to die, wither. Related: Mourned; mourning.


shrink (v.)

Old English scrincan to draw in the limbs, contract, shrivel up; wither, pine away (class III strong
verb; past tense scranc, past participle scruncen), from Proto-Germanic *skrink- (cognates: Middle
Dutch schrinken), probably from PIE root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.1)).    Originally
with causal shrench (compare drink/drench). Sense of become reduced in size recorded from late 13c.
The meaning draw back, recoil (early 14c.) perhaps was suggested by the behavior of snails.
Transitive sense, cause to shrink is from late 14c. Shrink-wrap is attested from 1961 (shrinking-
wrap from 1959). Shrinking violet shy person attested from 1882.


skeleton (n.)

1570s, from Modern Latin sceleton bones, bony framework of the body, from Greek skeleton soma dried-
up body, mummy, skeleton, from neuter of skeletos dried-up (also, as a noun, dried body, mummy),
from skellein dry up, make dry, parch, from PIE root *skele- to parch, wither (see sclero-).
Skelton was an early variant form. The noun use of Greek skeletos passed into Late Latin (sceletus),
hence French squelette and rare English skelet (1560s), Spanish esqueleto, Italian scheletro. The
meaning bare outline is first recorded c.1600; hence skeleton crew (1778), skeleton key, etc. Phrase
skeleton in the closet source of secret shame to a person or family is from 1812.


