witticism (n.)

1670s, coined by Dryden (as wittycism) from witty on model of criticism.    That every witticism is
an inexact thought: that what is perfectly true is imperfectly witty .... [Walter Savage Landor,
Imaginary Conversations]


zing (n.)

1911, high pitched sound, of echoic origin. Slang meaning energy, zest is attested from 1918. Verb
is from 1920; meaning to deliver a stinging witticism or retort is by 1975.


asteism (n.)

genteel irony, polite mockery, 1580s, from Greek asteismos wit, witticism, from asteios of a city or
town (as opposed to country), from asty town, city, especially (without the article) Athens.


facetious (adj.)

1590s, from French fac&eacute;tieux, from fac&eacute;tie a joke (15c.), from Latin facetia jest,
witticism, from facetus witty, elegant, fine, courteous, of unknown origin, perhaps related to facis
torch.    It implies a desire to be amusing, often intrusive or ill-timed.  Related: Facetiously;
facetiousness. Faceti&aelig; in booksellers' catalogues, is, like curious, a euphemism for erotica.
[Fowler]


wit (n.)

mental capacity, Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit understanding, intellect, sense;
knowledge, consciousness, conscience, from Proto-Germanic *wit- (cognates: Old Saxon wit, Old Norse
vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi knowledge, understanding,
intelligence, mind, German Witz wit, witticism, joke, Gothic unwiti ignorance), from PIE *weid- to
see, metaphorically to know (see vision). Related to Old English witan to know (source of wit (v.)).
Meaning ability to connect ideas and express them in an amusing way is first recorded 1540s; that of
person of wit or learning is from late 15c. For nuances of usage, see humor.    A witty saying
proves nothing. [Voltaire, Diner du Comte de Boulainvilliers]   <hr />   Wit ought to be five or six
degrees above the ideas that form the intelligence of an audience. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]
Witjar was old slang (18c.) for head, skull. Witling (1690s) was a pretender to wit.


