wont (n.)

habitual usage, custom, c.1400, from wont, adjective and verb.


wonted (adj.)

accustomed, usual, c.1400, adjectival formation from wont.  An unconscious double past participle.


wont (adj.)

accustomed, Middle English contraction of Old English wunod, past participle of wunian to dwell,
inhabit, exist; be accustomed, be used to, from Proto-Germanic *wunen to be content, to rejoice
(cognates: Old Saxon wunon, Old Frisian wonia to dwell, remain, be used to, Old High German wonen,
German wohnen to dwell; related to Old English winnan, gewinnan to win (see win (v.)) and to wean;
from PIE *wen- (1) strive for, desire. The original meaning of the Germanic verbs was be content,
rejoice.


titties (n.)

1746, tetties (plural), a nursery or dialect diminutive variant of teats (see teat).   Margery.
Come, be quite;--be quite, es zey, a grabbling o' wone's Tetties.---Es wont ha' ma Tetties a
grabbled zo ; ner es wont be mullad and foulad.---Stand azide; come, gi' o'er. [Exmoor Courtship,
or, A Suitoring Discourse, in the Devonshire Dialect and Mode, near the forest of Exmoor, 1746]


joker (n.)

1729, jester, merry fellow, agent noun from joke (v.). In generic slang use for any man, fellow,
chap by 1811, which probably is the source of the meaning odd face card in the deck (1868). An 1857
edition of Hoyle's Games lists a card game called Black Joke in which all face cards were called
jokers.  American manufacturers of playing-cards are wont to include a blank card at the top of the
pack; and it is, alas! true that some thrifty person suggested that the card should not be wasted.
This was the origin of the joker. [St. James's Gazette, 1894]


hoot (v.)

to call or shout in disapproval or scorn, c.1600, probably related to or a variant of Middle English
houten, huten to shout, call out (c.1200), probably ultimately imitative. First used of bird cries,
especially that of the owl, mid-15c. Related: Hooted; hooting. As a noun from mid-15c. Meaning a
laugh, something funny is first recorded 1942. Slang sense of smallest amount or particle (the hoot
you don't give when you don't care) is from 1891.    A dod blasted ole fool! answered the captain,
who, till now, had been merely an amused on-looker. Ye know all this rumpus wont do nobuddy a hoot
o' good--not a hoot. [Along Traverse Shores, Traverse City, Michigan, 1891]   Hooter in the same
sense is from 1839.   <b>HOOTER</b>. Probably a corruption of iota. Common in New York in such
phrases as I don't care a hooter for him. This note ain't worth a hooter. [John Russell Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1877]


