worldly (adj.)

Old English woruldlic earthly, secular, from the roots of world and like (adj.). A common Germanic
compound (Old Frisian wraldlik, Old Saxon weroldlik, Middle Dutch wereldlik, German weltlich, Old
Norse veraldligr). Worldly-wise is recorded from c.1400.


proprietary (adj.)

mid-15c., possessing worldly goods in excess of a cleric's needs, from Medieval Latin proprietarius
owner of property, noun use of Late Latin adjective proprietarius of a property holder, from Latin
proprietas owner (see property). Meaning held in private ownership is first attested 1580s. The word
was used earlier in English as a noun meaning proprietor, also worldly person (c.1400), from a noun
use in French and Medieval Latin.


sophisticated (adj.)

c.1600, mixed with a foreign substance, impure; no longer simple or natural, past participle
adjective from sophisticate (v.). Of persons, with a positive sense, worldly-wise, discriminating,
cultured, from 1895.


carnalite (n.)

worldly minded man, one addicted to fleshly practices, 1570s, from carnal + -ite (1).


carpetbagger (n.)

also carpet-bagger, 1868, American English, scornful appellation for Northerners who went South
after the fall of the CSA seeking private gain or political advancement. The name is based on the
image of men arriving with all their worldly goods in a big carpetbag. Sense later extended to any
opportunist from out of the area.


around (adv.)

c.1300, in circumference, from phrase on round. Rare before 1600. In sense of here and there with no
fixed direction it is 1776, American English (properly about). Of time, from 1888. To have been
around gained worldly experience is from 1927, U.S. colloquial.


secularize (v.)

1610s, of property, offices, etc., from secular + -ize. From 1711 as to become worldly; from 1846 of
education, social institutions, etc. Related: Secularized; secularizing.


unworldly (adj.)

1707, from un- (1) not + worldly (adj.). Related: Unworldliness.


abstraction (n.)

c.1400, a withdrawal from worldly affairs, asceticism, from Old French abstraction (14c.), from
Latin abstractionem (nominative abstractio), noun of action from past participle stem of abstrahere
(see abstract (adj.)). Meaning idea of something that has no actual existence is from 1640s.


earthly (adj.)

Old English eor&thorn;lic earthly, worldly; see earth + -ly (1).


pomp (n.)

c.1300, from Old French pompe pomp, magnificence (13c.) and directly from Latin pompa procession,
pomp, from Greek pompe solemn procession, display, literally a sending, from pempein to send. In
Church Latin, used in deprecatory sense for worldly display, vain show.


expropriation (n.)

mid-15c., renunciation of worldly goods, from Medieval Latin expropriationem (nominative
expropriatio), noun of action from Late Latin expropriare deprive of property, from ex- away from
(see ex-) + propriare to appropriate (see appropriate). Sense of a taking of someone's property,
especially for public use, is from 1848; as Weekley puts it, Current sense of organized theft
appears to have arisen among Ger. socialists.


carnal (adj.)

c.1400, physical, human, mortal, from Old French carnal and directly from Medieval Latin carnalis
natural, of the same blood, from Latin carnis of the flesh, genitive of caro flesh, meat (see
carnage). Meaning sensual is from early 15c.; that of worldly, sinful is from mid-15c. Carnal
knowledge is attested from early 15c. and was in legal use by 1680s.


active (adj.)

mid-14c., given to worldly activity (opposed to contemplative or monastic), from Old French actif
(12c.) or directly from Latin activus, from actus (see act (n.)). As capable of acting (opposed to
passive), from late 14c. Meaning energetic, lively is from 1590s; that of working, effective, in
operation is from 1640s. Active voice is recorded from 1765 (grammatical use of active dates from
mid-15c.).


temporal (adj.)

late 14c., worldly, secular; also terrestrial, earthly; temporary, lasting only for a time, from Old
French temporal earthly, and directly from from Latin temporalis of a time, but for a time,
temporary, from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season, proper time or season, of unknown origin.
Related: Temporally.


vile (adj.)

late 13c., morally repugnant; morally flawed, corrupt, wicked; of no value; of inferior quality;
disgusting, foul, ugly; degrading, humiliating; of low estate, without worldly honor or esteem, from
Anglo-French ville, Old French vil shameful, dishonorable; low-born; cheap; ugly, hideous, from
Latin vilis cheap, worthless, base, common, of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *wes- (1) to
buy, sell (see venal). Related: Vilely; vileness; vilety (early 13c.).


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


muckraker (n.)

c.1600, one who rakes muck, from muck (n.) + agent noun from rake (v.). Meaning one who inquires
into and publishes scandal and allegations of corruption among political and business leaders,
popularized 1906 in speech by President Theodore Roosevelt, in reference to man ... with a Muckrake
in his hand in Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1684) who seeks worldly gain by raking filth.The men
with the muck-rakes are often indispensable to the well-being of society, but only if they know when
to stop raking the muck. [T. Roosevelt, quoted in Cincinnati Enquirer, April 15, 1906.] Muckrake in
sense person who hunts scandal is attested from 1872. To muckrake (v.) in the literal sense is from
1879; figuratively from 1910. Related: Muckraking.


mundane (adj.)

mid-15c., of this world, from Old French mondain of this world, worldly, earthly, secular; also
pure, clean; noble, generous (12c.), from Late Latin mundanus belonging to the world (as distinct
from the Church), in classical Latin a citizen of the world, cosmopolite, from mundus universe,
world, literally clean, elegant; used as a translation of Greek khosmos (see cosmos) in its
Pythagorean sense of the physical universe (the original sense of the Greek word was orderly
arrangement). Latin mundus also was used of a woman's ornaments, dress, and is related to the
adjective mundus clean, elegant (used of women's dress, etc.). Related: Mundanely.


glory (n.)

c.1200, gloire the splendor of God or Christ; praise offered to God, worship, from Old French glorie
(11c., Modern French gloire), from Latin gloria fame, renown, great praise or honor, of uncertain
origin.    Greek doxa expectation (Homer), later opinion, fame, and ultimately glory, was used in
Biblical writing to translate a Hebrew word which had a sense of brightness, splendor, magnificence,
majesty, and this subsequently was translated as Latin gloria, which has colored that word's meaning
in most European tongues. Wuldor was an Old English word used in this sense. Sense of magnificence
is c.1300 in English. Meaning worldly honor, fame, renown of the kingdom of Heaven, and of one who
is a source of glory are from mid-14c. Latin also had gloriola a little fame. Glory days was in use
by 1970.


secular (adj.)

c.1300, living in the world, not belonging to a religious order, also belonging to the state, from
Old French seculer (Modern French s&#233;culier), from Late Latin saecularis worldly, secular,
pertaining to a generation or age, from Latin saecularis of an age, occurring once in an age, from
saeculum age, span of time, generation.    According to Watkins, this is probably from PIE *sai-
tlo-, with instrumental element *-tlo- + *sai- to bind, tie (see sinew), extended metaphorically to
successive human generations as links in the chain of life. Another theory connects it with words
for seed, from PIE root *se- to sow (see sow (v.), and compare Gothic mana-se&thorn;s mankind,
world, literally seed of men).    Used in ecclesiastical writing like Greek aion of this world (see
cosmos). It is source of French si&egrave;cle. Ancient Roman ludi saeculares was a three-day, day-
and-night celebration coming once in an age (120 years). In English, in reference to humanism and
the exclusion of belief in God from matters of ethics and morality, from 1850s.


estate (n.)

early 13c., rank, standing, condition, from Anglo-French astat, Old French estat state, position,
condition, health, status, legal estate (Modern French &eacute;tat), from Latin status state or
condition, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    For the excrescent e-, see e-. Sense of
property is late 14c., from that of worldly prosperity; specific application to landed property
(usually of large extent) is first recorded in American English 1620s. A native word for this was
Middle English ethel (Old English &aelig;&eth;el) ancestral land or estate, patrimony. Meaning
collective assets of a dead person or debtor is from 1830.    The three estates (in Sweden and
Aragon, four) conceived as orders in the body politic date from late 14c. In France, they are the
clergy, nobles, and townsmen; in England, originally the clergy, barons, and commons, later Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and commons. For Fourth Estate see four.


cosmos (n.)

c.1200 (but not popular until 1848, as a translation of Humboldt's Kosmos), from Latinized form of
Greek kosmos order, good order, orderly arrangement, a word with several main senses rooted in those
notions: The verb kosmein meant generally to dispose, prepare, but especially to order and arrange
(troops for battle), to set (an army) in array; also to establish (a government or regime); to deck,
adorn, equip, dress (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of ornaments
of a woman's dress, decoration (compare kosmokomes dressing the hair) as well as the universe, the
world.    Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to the universe, perhaps
originally meaning the starry firmament, but later it was extended to the whole physical world,
including the earth. For specific reference to the world of people, the classical phrase was he
oikoumene (ge) the inhabited (earth). Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene. Kosmos also was
used in Christian religious writing with a sense of worldly life, this world (as opposed to the
afterlife), but the more frequent word for this was aion, literally lifetime, age.


end (n.)

Old English ende end, conclusion, boundary, district, species, class, from Proto-Germanic *andja
(cognates: Old Frisian enda, Old Dutch ende, Dutch einde, Old Norse endir end; Old High German enti
top, forehead, end, German ende, Gothic andeis end), originally the opposite side, from PIE *antjo
end, boundary, from root *ant- opposite, in front of, before (see ante).    Original sense of
outermost part is obsolete except in phrase ends of the earth. Sense of destruction, death was in
Old English. Meaning division or quarter of a town was in Old English. The end the last straw, the
limit (in a disparaging sense) is from 1929.    The phrase end run is first attested 1902 in U.S.
football; extended to military tactics in World War II; general figurative sense is from 1968. End
time in reference to the end of the world is from 1917. To end it all commit suicide is attested by
1911. Be-all and end-all is from Shakespeare (Macbeth I.vii.5).Worldly wealth he cared not for,
desiring onely to make both ends meet. [Thomas Fuller, The History of the Worthies of England, 1662]


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


world (n.)

Old English woruld, worold human existence, the affairs of life, also a long period of time, also
the human race, mankind, humanity, a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon
werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt, German Welt),
with a literal sense of age of man, from Proto-Germanic *wer man (Old English wer, still in
werewolf; see virile) + *ald age (see old).    Originally life on earth, this world (as opposed to
the afterlife), sense extended to the known world, then to the physical world in the broadest sense,
the universe (c.1200). In Old English gospels, the commonest word for the physical world, was
Middangeard (Old Norse Midgard), literally the middle enclosure (see yard (n.1)), which is rooted in
Germanic cosmology. Greek kosmos in its ecclesiastical sense of world of people sometimes was
rendered in Gothic as manase&thorn;s, literally seed of man. The usual Old Norse word was heimr,
literally abode (see home). Words for world in some other Indo-European languages derive from the
root for bottom, foundation (such as Irish domun, Old Church Slavonic duno, related to English
deep); the Lithuanian word is pasaulis, from pa- under + saule sun.    Original sense in world
without end, translating Latin saecula saeculorum, and in worldly. Latin saeculum can mean both age
and world, as can Greek aion. Meaning a great quantity or number is from 1580s. Out of this world
surpassing, marvelous is from 1928; earlier it meant dead. World Cup is by 1951; U.S. baseball World
Series is by 1893 (originally often World's Series). World power in the geopolitical sense first
recorded 1900. World-class is attested from 1950, originally of Olympic athletes.


