wrathful (adj.)

c.1300, from wrath + -ful. Related: Wrathfully; wrathfulness.


wrath (n.)

Old English wr&aelig;&eth;&eth;u anger, from wra&eth; angry (see wroth) + -&thorn;u, from Proto-
Germanic -itho (as in strength, width etc.; see -th (2)).


ire (n.)

c.1300, from Old French ire anger, wrath, violence (11c.), from Latin ira anger, wrath, rage,
passion, from PIE root *eis-, forming various words denoting passion cognates: Greek hieros filled
with the divine, holy, oistros gadfly, originally thing causing madness; Sanskrit esati drives on,
yasati boils; Avestan aesma anger).    Old English irre in a similar sense is from an adjective irre
wandering, straying, angry, cognate with Old Saxon irri angry, Old High German irri wandering,
deranged, also angry; Gothic airzeis astray, and Latin errare wander, go astray, angry (see err
(v.)).


Dies Irae

literally day of wrath, first words of Latin hymn of Last Judgment, attributed to Thomas of Celano
(c.1250). See diurnal + ire.


Okie

migrant agricultural worker, especially one driven from farms in Oklahoma during the Dust Bowl,
1938, short for U.S. state of Oklahoma.  Okie use' ta mean you was from Oklahoma. Now it means
you're a dirty son-of-a-bitch. [John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath, 1939]


anger (n.)

mid-13c., distress, suffering; anguish, agony, also hostile attitude, ill will, surliness, from Old
Norse angr distress, grief. sorrow, affliction, from the same root as anger (v.). Sense of rage,
wrath is early 14c. Old Norse also had angr-gapi rash, foolish person; angr-lauss free from care;
angr-lyndi sadness, low spirits.


twerp (n.)

of unknown origin; OED and Barnhart give earliest date as 1925, but the Dictionary of American Slang
gives a first reference of 1874 (but without citation and I can't find it), which, if correct, would
rule out the usual theory that it is from the proper name of T.W. Earp, a student at Oxford c.1911,
who kindled wrath in the hearts of the rugger-playing stalwarts at Oxford, when he was president of
the Union, by being the last, most charming, and wittiest of the 'decadents.'  [Rawson]    Mean to
say you never heard of Sinzy? Why, he's one of the greatest characters in this town. He's a terrible
twerp to look at -- got a face like bad news from home, but I guess he's the best jazz piano player
in the world. [Julian Street, Cross-Sections, 1923]


slake (v.)

late Old English sleacian, slacian become slack or remiss; slacken an effort (intransitive); delay,
retard (transitive), from sl&aelig;c lax (see slack (adj.)). Transitive sense of make slack is from
late 12c. Sense of allay, diminish in force, quench, extinguish (in reference to thirst, hunger,
desire, wrath, etc.) first recorded early 14c. via notion of make slack or inactive. Related:
Slaked; slaking.


nemesis

1570s, Nemesis, Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath, from Greek nemesis just
indignation, righteous anger, literally distribution (of what is due), related to nemein distribute,
allot, apportion one's due, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot, to take (cognates: Old
English, Gothic niman to take, German nehmen; see nimble). With a lower-case -n-, in the sense of
retributive justice, attested from 1590s. General sense of anything by which it seems one must be
defeated is 20c.


expiation (n.)

early 15c., via Middle French expiation or directly from Latin expiationem (nominative expiatio)
satisfaction, atonement, noun of action from past participle stem of expiare make amends, from ex-
completely (see ex-) + piare propitiate, appease, from pius faithful, loyal, devout (see pious).The
sacrifice of expiation is that which tendeth to appease the wrath of God. [Thomas Norton,
translation of Calvin's Institutes of Christian Religion, 1561]


courage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corage (12c., Modern French courage) heart, innermost feelings; temper, from
Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin cor heart (see
heart) which remains a common metaphor for inner strength.    In Middle English, used broadly for
what is in one's mind or thoughts, hence bravery, but also wrath, pride, confidence, lustiness, or
any sort of inclination. Replaced Old English ellen, which also meant zeal, strength.


anger (v.)

c.1200, to irritate, annoy, provoke, from Old Norse angra to grieve, vex, distress; to be vexed at,
take offense with, from Proto-Germanic *angus (cognates: Old English enge narrow, painful, Middle
Dutch enghe, Gothic aggwus narrow), from PIE root *angh- tight, painfully constricted, painful
(cognates: Sanskrit amhu- narrow, amhah anguish; Armenian anjuk narrow; Lithuanian ankstas narrow;
Greek ankhein to squeeze, ankhone a strangling; Latin angere to throttle, torment; Old Irish cum-ang
straitness, want). In Middle English, also of physical pain. Meaning excite to wrath, make angry is
from late 14c. Related: Angered; angering.


mood (n.1)

emotional condition, frame of mind, Old English mod heart, frame of mind, spirit; courage,
arrogance, pride; power, violence, from Proto-Germanic *motha- (cognates: Old Saxon mod mind,
courage, Old Frisian mod intellect, mind, intention, Old Norse mo&eth;r wrath, anger, Middle Dutch
moet, Dutch moed, Old High German muot, German Mut courage, Gothic mo&thorn;s courage, anger), of
unknown origin.    A much more vigorous word in Anglo-Saxon than currently, and used widely in
compounds (such as modcr&aelig;ftig intelligent, modful proud). To be in the mood willing (to do
something) is from 1580s. First record of mood swings is from 1942.


rage (n.)

c.1300, madness, insanity; fit of frenzy; anger, wrath; fierceness in battle; violence of storm,
fire, etc., from Old French rage, raige spirit, passion, rage, fury, madness (11c.), from Medieval
Latin rabia, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (compare rabies,
which originally had this sense), from PIE *rebh- violent, impetuous (cognates: Old English rabbian
to rage). Similarly, Welsh (cynddaredd) and Breton (kounnar) words for rage, fury originally meant
hydrophobia and are compounds based on the word for dog (Welsh ci, plural cwn; Breton ki). In
15c.-16c. it also could mean rabies. The rage fashion, vogue dates from 1785.


Munich

Bavarian capital, German M&uuml;nchen, from root of M&ouml;nch monk (see monk); founded 1158 as a
market town by Benedictine monks. In allusions to appeasement it is from the meeting of German,
British, French and Italian representatives there in Sept. 29, 1938, which resulted in the cession
of Sudetenland to Germany in exchange for Hitler's pledges.    During the flight Daladier sat silent
and morose, worried about the reception he would receive at Le Bourget, about how the French would
react to his having betrayed Czechoslovakia and France's promises. As the plane circled for landing,
he and others saw a massive crowd awaiting them. Expecting jeers, hisses, rotten fruit, and maybe
worse, Daladier declared stolidly: 'They are going to mob me, I suppose. ... I appreciate their
feelings,' and insisted on absorbing their wrath by being the first off the plane. But as he stood
dumbfounded on the gangplank, thousands surged forward carrying flags and flowers, shouting 'Hurrah
for France! Hurrah for England! Hurrah for peace!' Daladier turned back to L&eacute;ger and cursed,
'The God-damned fools!' [Benjamin F. Martin, France in 1938]


shit (v.)

Old English scitan, from Proto-Germanic *skit- (cognates: North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten,
German scheissen), from PIE *skei- to cut, split, divide, separate (see shed (v.)). The notion is of
separation from the body (compare Latin excrementum, from excernere to separate, Old English scearn
dung, muck, from scieran to cut, shear; see sharn). It is thus a cousin to science and conscience.
<b>Shit is not an acronym</b>. The notion that it is a recent word might be partly because it was
taboo from c.1600 and rarely appeared in print (neither Shakespeare nor the KJV has it), and even in
vulgar publications of the late 18c. it is disguised by dashes. It drew the wrath of censors as late
as 1922 (Ulysses and The Enormous Room), scandalized magazine subscribers in 1957 (a Hemingway story
in Atlantic Monthly) and was omitted from some dictionaries as recently as 1970 (Webster's New
World).    Extensive slang usage; meaning to lie, to tease is from 1934; that of to disrespect is
from 1903. Shite, now a jocular or slightly euphemistic and chiefly British variant of the noun,
formerly a dialectal variant, reflects the vowel in the Old English verb (compare German scheissen);
the modern verb has been influenced by the noun. Shat is a humorous past tense form, not
etymological, first recorded 18c. To shit bricks be very frightened attested by 1961. The connection
between fear and involuntary defecation has generated expressions since 14c., and probably also is
behind scared shitless (1936).


ghost (n.)

Old English gast soul, spirit, life, breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon, from Proto-Germanic
*ghoizdoz (cognates: Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German
Geist spirit, ghost), from PIE root *gheis- to be excited, amazed, frightened (cognates: Sanskrit
hedah wrath; Avestan zaesha- horrible, frightful; Gothic usgaisjan, Old English g&aelig;stan to
frighten). This was the usual West Germanic word for supernatural being, and the primary sense seems
to have been connected to the idea of to wound, tear, pull to pieces. The surviving Old English
senses, however, are in Christian writing, where it is used to render Latin spiritus (see spirit
(n.)), a sense preserved in Holy Ghost. Modern sense of disembodied spirit of a dead person is
attested from late 14c. and returns the word toward its ancient sense.    Most Indo-European words
for soul, spirit also double with reference to supernatural spirits. Many have a base sense of
appearance (such as Greek phantasma; French spectre; Polish widmo, from Old Church Slavonic videti
to see; Old English scin, Old High German giskin, originally appearance, apparition, related to Old
English scinan, Old High German skinan to shine). Other concepts are in French revenant, literally
returning (from the other world), Old Norse aptr-ganga, literally back-comer. Breton bugelnoz is
literally night-child. Latin manes probably is a euphemism.    The gh- spelling appeared early 15c.
in Caxton, influenced by Flemish and Middle Dutch gheest, but was rare in English before mid-16c.
Sense of slight suggestion (in ghost image, ghost of a chance, etc.) is first recorded 1610s; that
in ghost writing is from 1884, but that term is not found until 1919. Ghost town is from 1908. To
give up the ghost die was in Old English. Ghost in the machine was Gilbert Ryle's term (1949) for
the mind viewed as separate from the body.


