wreak (v.)

Old English wrecan avenge, originally to drive, drive out, punish (class V strong verb; past tense
wr&aelig;c, past participle wrecen), from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (cognates: Old Saxon wrekan, Old
Norse reka, Old Frisian wreka, Middle Dutch wreken to drive, push, compel, pursue, throw, Old High
German rehhan, German r&auml;chen to avenge, Gothic wrikan to persecute), from PIE root *wreg- to
push, shove, drive, track down (see urge (v.)). Meaning inflict or take vengeance, with on, is
recorded from late 15c.; that of inflict or cause (damage or destruction) is attested from 1817.
Compare wrack (v.). Related: Wreaked; wreaking.


wrack (n.)

late 14c., wrecked ship, shipwreck, probably from Middle Dutch wrak wreck, from Proto-Germanic
*wrakaz-, from root *wreg- to push, shove drive (see wreak). The root sense perhaps is that which is
cast ashore. Sense perhaps influenced by Old English wr&aelig;c misery, punishment, and wrecan to
punish, drive out (source of modern wreak). The meaning damage, disaster, destruction (in wrack and
ruin) is from c.1400, from the Old English word, but conformed in spelling to this one. Sense of
seaweed, etc., cast up on shore is recorded from 1510s, probably an alteration of wreck (n.) in this
sense (mid-15c.). Wrack, wreck, rack and wretch were utterly tangled in spelling and somewhat in
sense in Middle and early modern English.


wreck (n.)

early 13c., goods cast ashore after a shipwreck, flotsam, from Anglo-French wrec, from a
Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse *wrek wreck, flotsam (cognates: Norwegian, Icelandic rek),
related to reka to drive, push, from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (see wreak (v.)). The meaning a
shipwreck is first recorded mid-15c.; that of a wrecked ship is by c.1500. General sense of remains
of anything that has been ruined is recorded from 1713; applied by 1795 to dissipated persons.
Compare wrack (v.).


wretch (n.)

Old English wrecca wretch, stranger, exile, from Proto-Germanic *wrakjon pursuer; one pursued
(cognates: Old Saxon wrekkio, Old High German reckeo a banished person, exile, German recke renowned
warrior, hero), related to Old English wreccan to drive out, punish (see wreak). The contrast in the
development of the meaning in Eng. and German is remarkable [OED]. Sense of vile, despicable person
developed in Old English, reflecting the sorry state of the outcast, as presented in Anglo-Saxon
verse (such as The Wanderer). Compare German Elend misery, from Old High German elilenti sojourn in
a foreign land, exile.


Frisbee

1957, trademark registered 1959 by Wham-O Co., the prototype modeled on pie tins from Mrs. Frisbie's
Pies, made by the Frisbie Bakery of Bridgeport, Connecticut, U.S. Middlebury College students began
tossing them around in the 1930s (though Yale and Princeton also claim to have discovered their
aerodynamic qualities).  Thirteen years ago the Wham-O Manufacturing Company of San Gabriel, Calif.,
... brought out the first Frisbee. Wham-O purchased the rights from a Los Angeles building inspector
named Fred Morrison, who in turn had been inspired by the airworthy pie tins of the Frisbie Bakery
in Bridgeport, Conn. (which went out of business in March of 1958). He changed the spelling to avoid
legal problems. [Sports Illustrated, Aug. 3, 1970]  The family name is attested in English records
from 1226, from a place name in Leicestershire (Frisby on the Wreak), attested from 1086, from Old
Danish, meaning farmstead or village of the Frisians.


