wrench (n.)

Old English wrenc a twisting, artifice, trick; see wrench (v.). The meaning tool with jaws at one
end for turning or holding is first recorded 1794.


wrench (v.)

Old English wrencan to twist, from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (cognates: Old High German renken,
German renken to twist, wrench, Old English wringan to wring), from PIE *wreng- to turn (cognates:
Sanskrit vrnakti turns, twists, Lithuanian rengtis to grow crooked, to writhe), nasalized variant of
*werg- to turn (cognates: Latin vergere to turn, tend toward), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend
(see versus). Related: Wrenched, wrenching.


Allen

masc. proper name, variant of Alan (q.v.). In reference to wrench, key, screw, etc. with hexagonal
socket or head, 1913, from the Allen Manufacturing Company of Hartford, Connecticut, U.S.


spanner (n.)

1630s, a tool for winding the spring of a wheel-lock firearm, from German Spanner, from spannen (see
span (v.)). Meaning wrench is from 1790. Figurative phrase spanner in the works attested from 1921
(Wodehouse).


convulse (v.)

1640s, transitive; 1680s, intransitive; from Latin convulsus, past participle of convellere
(transitive only) to pull away, to pull this way and that, wrench, hence to weaken, overthrow,
destroy (see convulsion). Related: Convulsed (1630s); convulsing.


extortion (n.)

c.1300, from Latin extortionem (nominative extortio) a twisting out, extorting, noun of action from
past participle stem of extorquere wrench out, wrest away, to obtain by force, from ex- out (see
ex-) + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)).


wrest (v.)

Old English wr&aelig;stan to twist, wrench, from Proto-Germanic *wraistjan (source of Old Norse
reista to bend, twist), from PIE  *wreik- to turn (see wry). Meaning to pull, detach (something) is
recorded from c.1300. Meaning to take by force (in reference to power, authority, etc.) is attested
from early 15c. Related: Wrested; wresting.


wrinkle (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), probably from stem of Old English gewrinclod wrinkled, crooked, winding,
past participle of gewrinclian to wind, crease, from perfective prefix ge- + -wrinclian to wind,
from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (see wrench (v.)). Intransitive sense from 1610s. Related: Wrinkled;
wrinkling.


tap (n.1)

stopper, faucet through which liquid can be drawn, Old English t&aelig;ppa tap, spigot, from Proto-
Germanic *tappon (cognates: Middle Dutch tappe, Dutch tap, Old High German zapfo, German Zapfe).
Originally a tapering cylindrical peg for a cask, then a hollowed one to draw from it (compare sense
evolution of spigot). Phrase on tap ready for use, ready to be drawn and served is recorded from
late 15c. Tap-wrench, used in turning one, attested from 1815.


torque (n.)

rotating force, 1882, from Latin torquere to twist, turn, turn about, twist awry, distort, torture,
from PIE *torkw-eyo-, causative of *terkw- to twist (see thwart (adv.)). The word also is used
(since 1834) by antiquarians and others as a term for the twisted metal necklace worn anciently by
Gauls, Britons, Germans, etc., from Latin torques collar of twisted metal, from torquere. Earlier it
had been called in English torques (1690s). Torque-wrench is from 1941.


socket (n.)

c.1300, spearhead (originally one shaped like a plowshare), from Anglo-French soket spearhead,
plowshare (mid-13c.), diminutive of Old French soc plowshare, from Vulgar Latin *soccus, perhaps
from a Gaulish source, from Celtic *sukko- (cognates: Welsh swch plowshare, Middle Irish soc
plowshare), properly hog's snout, from PIE *su- pig (cognates: Latin sus swine; see sow (n.) female
pig).    Meaning hollow part or piece for receiving and holding something first recorded early 15c.;
anatomical sense is from c.1600; domestic electrical sense first recorded 1885. Socket wrench is
attested from 1837. The verb is 1530s, from the noun. Related: Socketed; socketing.


monkey (n.)

1520s, likely from an unrecorded Middle Low German *moneke or Middle Dutch *monnekijn, a colloquial
word for monkey, originally a diminutive of some Romanic word, compare French monne (16c.); Middle
Italian monnicchio, from Old Italian monna; Spanish mona ape, monkey. In a 1498 Low German version
of the popular medieval beast story Roman de Renart (Reynard the Fox), Moneke is the name given to
the son of Martin the Ape; transmission of the word to English might have been via itinerant
entertainers from the German states.    The Old French form of the name is Monequin (recorded as
Monnekin in a 14c. version from Hainault), which could be a diminutive of some personal name, or it
could be from the general Romanic word, which may be ultimately from Arabic maimun monkey, literally
auspicious, a euphemistic usage because the sight of apes was held by the Arabs to be unlucky
[Klein]. The word would have been influenced in Italian by folk etymology from monna woman, a
contraction of ma donna my lady.  Monkey has been used affectionately for child since c.1600. As a
type of modern popular dance, it is attested from 1964. Monkey business attested from 1883. Monkey
suit fancy uniform is from 1886. Monkey wrench is attested from 1858; its figurative sense of
something that obstructs operations is from the notion of one getting jammed in the gears of
machinery (compare spanner in the works). To make a monkey of someone is attested from 1900. To have
a monkey on one's back be addicted is 1930s narcotics slang, though the same phrase in the 1860s
meant to be angry. There is a story in the Sinbad cycle about a tormenting ape-like creature that
mounts a man's shoulders and won't get off, which may be the root of the term. In 1890s British
slang, to have a monkey up the chimney meant to have a mortgage on one's house. The three wise
monkeys (see no evil, etc.) are attested from 1926.


