wretched (adj.)

c.1200, wrecched, an irregular formation from wrecche wretch (see wretch). Also see wicked. Related:
Wretchedly; wretchedness.


wretch (n.)

Old English wrecca wretch, stranger, exile, from Proto-Germanic *wrakjon pursuer; one pursued
(cognates: Old Saxon wrekkio, Old High German reckeo a banished person, exile, German recke renowned
warrior, hero), related to Old English wreccan to drive out, punish (see wreak). The contrast in the
development of the meaning in Eng. and German is remarkable [OED]. Sense of vile, despicable person
developed in Old English, reflecting the sorry state of the outcast, as presented in Anglo-Saxon
verse (such as The Wanderer). Compare German Elend misery, from Old High German elilenti sojourn in
a foreign land, exile.


recreant (n.)

one who yields in combat, one who begs for mercy, one who admits defeat, early 15c., hence coward,
faint-hearted wretch; from recreant (adj.) and from Old French recreant as a noun, one who
acknowledges defeat, a craven, coward, renegade, traitor, wretch. In English, sense of apostate,
deserter, villain is from 1560s.


mesel

leprous (adj.); a leper (n.); both c.1300,  from Old French mesel wretched, leprous; a wretch, from
Latin misellus wretched, unfortunate, as a noun, a wretch, in Medieval Latin, a leper, diminutive of
miser wretched, unfortunate, miserable (see miser). Also from Latin misellus are Old Italian misello
sick, leprous, Catalan mesell sick.


Kaffir (n.)

1790, from Arabic kafir unbeliever, infidel, impious wretch, with a literal sense of one who does
not admit the blessings of God, from kafara to cover up, conceal, deny, blot out. Technically, non-
Muslim, but in Ottoman times it came to be used almost exclusively for Christian. Early English
missionaries used it as an equivalent of heathen to refer to Bantus in South Africa (1792), from
which use it came generally to mean South African black regardless of ethnicity, and to be a term of
abuse since at least 1934.


pedantic (adj.)

formed in English c.1600, from pedant + -ic. The French equivalent is p&eacute;dantesque. Perhaps
first attested in John Donne's Sunne Rising, where he bids the morning sun let his love and him
linger in bed, telling it, Sawcy pedantique wretch, goe chide Late schooleboyes. Related: Pedantical
(1580s); pedantically.


wicked (adj.)

c.1200, extended form of earlier wick bad, wicked, false (12c.), which apparently is an adjectival
use of Old English wicca wizard (see wicca). Formed as if a past participle, but there is no
corresponding verb. For evolution, compare wretched from wretch. Slang ironic sense of wonderful
first attested 1920, in F. Scott Fitzgerald. As an adverb from early 15c. Related: Wickedly.


garcon (n.)

boy, c.1300, from Old French gar&ccedil;un (11c.; Modern French gar&ccedil;on) menial, servant-boy,
page; man of base condition, originally objective case of gars, perhaps from Frankish *wrakjo-, from
Proto-Germanic *wrakjon- (cognates: Old High German recko, Old Saxon wrekkio a banished person,
exile; English wretch). Meaning waiter (especially one in a French restaurant) is from 1788.


hinder (adj,)

situated in the rear, toward the back, late 14c., probably from Old English hinder (adv.) behind,
back, afterward, but treated as a comparative of hind (adj.). Related to Old High German hintar,
German hinter, Gothic hindar behind. Middle English had hinderhede, literally hinder-hood; posterity
in time, inferiority in rank; and hinderling person fallen from moral or social respectability,
wretch.


truant (n.)

c.1200, beggar, vagabond, from Old French truant beggar, rogue (12c.), as an adjective, wretched,
miserable, of low caste, from Gaulish *trougant- (compare Breton *truan, later truant vagabond,
Welsh truan wretch, Gaelic truaghan wretched), of uncertain origin. Compare Spanish truhan buffoon,
from same source. Meaning one who wanders from an appointed place, especially a child who stays away
from school without leave is first attested mid-15c.


thrall (n.)

late Old English &thorn;r&aelig;l bondman, serf, slave, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse
&thorn;r&aelig;ll slave, servant, figuratively wretch, scoundrel, probably from Proto-Germanic
*thrakhilaz, literally runner, from root *threh- to run (cognates: Old High German dregil servant,
properly runner; Old English &thorn;r&aelig;gan, Gothic &thorn;ragjan to run). Meaning condition of
servitude is from early 14c.


patron (n.)

a lord-master, a protector, c.1300, from Old French patron patron, protector, patron saint (12c.)
and directly from Medieval Latin patronus patron saint, bestower of a benefice, lord, master, model,
pattern, from Latin patronus defender, protector, former master (of a freed slave); advocate, from
pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)). Meaning one who advances the cause (of an artist,
institution, etc.), usually by the person's wealth and power, is attested from late 14c.; commonly a
wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery [Johnson]. Commercial sense of regular
customer first recorded c.1600. Patron saint (1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).


miser (n.)

1540s, miserable person, wretch, from Latin miser (adj.) unhappy, wretched, pitiable, in distress,
of unknown origin. Original sense now obsolete; main modern meaning of money-hoarding person
recorded 1560s, from presumed unhappiness of such people.    Besides general wretchedness, the Latin
word connoted also intense erotic love (compare slang got it bad deeply infatuated) and hence was a
favorite word of Catullus. In Greek a miser was kyminopristes, literally a cumin seed splitter. In
Modern Greek, he might be called hekentabelones, literally one who has sixty needles. The German
word, filz, literally felt, preserves the image of the felt slippers which the miser often wore in
caricatures. Lettish mantrausis miser is literally money-raker.


shend (n.)

shame, disgrace (obsolete or dialectal), Old English scand ignominy, shame, confusion, disgrace;
scandal, disgraceful thing; wretch, impostor, infamous man; bad woman, from the source of Old
English scamu shame (see shame (n.)) + -&#254;a, with change of -m- to -n- before a dental (compare
Old Frisian skande, Dutch schande, Old High German scanda, German Schande disgrace). Also in early
Modern English as a verb, shend (Old English scendan) put to shame; blame, reproach; bring to ruin.
It was active in forming compounds, such as shendful (Old English scandful) shameful, shendship
disgrace; Old English scandhus house of ill-fame, scandlic shameful, scandlufiende loving
shamefully, scandword obscene language).


wrack (n.)

late 14c., wrecked ship, shipwreck, probably from Middle Dutch wrak wreck, from Proto-Germanic
*wrakaz-, from root *wreg- to push, shove drive (see wreak). The root sense perhaps is that which is
cast ashore. Sense perhaps influenced by Old English wr&aelig;c misery, punishment, and wrecan to
punish, drive out (source of modern wreak). The meaning damage, disaster, destruction (in wrack and
ruin) is from c.1400, from the Old English word, but conformed in spelling to this one. Sense of
seaweed, etc., cast up on shore is recorded from 1510s, probably an alteration of wreck (n.) in this
sense (mid-15c.). Wrack, wreck, rack and wretch were utterly tangled in spelling and somewhat in
sense in Middle and early modern English.


