wring (v.)

Old English wringan press, strain, wring, twist (class III strong verb; past tense wrang, past
participle wrungen), from Proto-Germanic *wreng- (cognates: Old English wringen to wring, press out,
Old Frisian wringa, Middle Dutch wringhen, Dutch wringen to wring, Old High German ringan to move to
and fro, to twist, German ringen to wrestle), from PIE *wrengh-, nasalized variant of *wergh- to
turn, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). To wring (one's) hands press the hands or
fingers tightly together (as though wringing) as an indication of distress or pain is attested from
c.1200.


wringer (n.)

device for squeezing water from clothes, 1799, agent noun from wring (v.). (Earlier it meant
extortioner, c.1300.) Figurative phrase to put (someone) through the wringer first recorded 1942,
American English.


wrangle (v.)

late 14c., from Low German wrangeln to dispute, to wrestle, related to Middle Low German wringen,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang-, from PIE *wrengh-, nasalized variant of *wergh- to turn (see wring).
Meaning take charge of horses is by 1897, American English. Related: Wrangled; wrangling. The noun
is recorded from 1540s.


tort (n.)

mid-13c., injury, wrong, from Old French tort wrong, injustice, crime (11c.), from Medieval Latin
tortum injustice, noun use of neuter of tortus wrung, twisted, past participle of Latin torquere
turn, turn awry, twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Legal sense of breach of a duty, whereby
someone acquires a right of action for damages is first recorded 1580s.


twist (v.)

c.1200 (implied in past tense form twaste), to wring, from twist (n.). Sense of to spin two or more
strands of yarn into thread is attested from late 15c. Meaning to move in a winding fashion is
recorded from 1630s.  To twist the lion's tail was U.S. slang (1895) for to provoke British feeling
(the lion being the symbol of Britain). To twist (someone's) arm in the figurative sense of pressure
(to do something) is from 1945. Related: Twisted; twisting.


tortuous (adj.)

late 14c., full of twists and turns, from Anglo-French tortuous (12c.), Old French tortuos, from
Latin tortuosus full of twists, winding, from tortus a twisting, winding, from stem of torquere to
twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Related: Tortuously; tortuousness.


wrench (v.)

Old English wrencan to twist, from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (cognates: Old High German renken,
German renken to twist, wrench, Old English wringan to wring), from PIE *wreng- to turn (cognates:
Sanskrit vrnakti turns, twists, Lithuanian rengtis to grow crooked, to writhe), nasalized variant of
*werg- to turn (cognates: Latin vergere to turn, tend toward), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend
(see versus). Related: Wrenched, wrenching.


torture (n.)

early 15c., contortion, twisting, distortion; a disorder characterized by contortion, from Old
French torture infliction of great pain; great pain, agony (12c.), and directly from Late Latin
tortura a twisting, writhing, in Medieval Latin pain inflicted by judicial or ecclesiastical
authority as a means of punishment or persuasion, from stem of Latin torquere to twist, turn, wind,
wring, distort (see torque (n.)). The meaning infliction of severe bodily pain as a means of
punishment or persuasion in English is from 1550s. The theory behind judicial torture was that a
guilty person could be made to confess, but an innocent one could not, by this means. Macaulay
writes that it was last inflicted in England in May 1640.


worry (v.)

Old English wyrgan to strangle, from Proto-Germanic *wurgjan (cognates: Middle Dutch worghen, Dutch
worgen, Old High German wurgen, German w&uuml;rgen to strangle, Old Norse virgill rope), from PIE
*wergh- to turn (see wring). Related: Worried; worrier; worrying.    The oldest sense was obsolete
in English after c.1600; meaning annoy, bother, vex, first recorded 1670s, developed from that of
harass by rough or severe treatment (1550s), as of dogs or wolves attacking sheep. Meaning to cause
mental distress or trouble is attested from 1822; intransitive sense of to feel anxiety or mental
trouble is first recorded 1860.


wrong (adj.)

late Old English, twisted, crooked, wry, from Old Norse rangr, earlier *wrangr crooked, wry, wrong,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang- (cognates: Danish vrang crooked, wrong, Middle Dutch wranc, Dutch wrang
sour, bitter, literally that which distorts the mouth), from PIE *wrengh-, variant of *wergh- to
turn (see wring).    Sense of not right, bad, immoral, unjust developed by c.1300. Wrong thus is
etymologically a negative of right (adj.1), which is from Latin rectus, literally straight. Latin
pravus was literally crooked, but most commonly wrong, bad; and other words for crooked also have
meant wrong in Italian and Slavic. Compare French tort wrong, injustice, from Latin tortus twisted.
As an adverb from c.1200. Wrong-headed first recorded 1732. To get up on the wrong side (of the bed)
be in a bad mood is recorded from 1801, according to OED, from its supposed influence on one's
temper; it appears in Halliwell's Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words in 1846, but doesn't
seem to have been used much generally before late 1870s. To be on the wrong side of a given age,
older than, is from 1660s. Wrong side of the road (that reservbed for oncoming traffic) is by 1838.
To be from (or on) the wrong side of the tracks from the poor part of town is from 1921, American
English.


