writ (n.)

Old English writ something written, piece of writing, from the past participle stem of writan (see
write). Used of legal documents or instruments since at least 1121.


fieri facias

writ concerning a sum awarded in judgment (often requiring seizure and sale of property for debt),
Latin, literally cause it to be done, the first words of the writ.


capias (n.)

writ of arrest issued by a court, mid-15c., from Latin capias, literally thou mayest take, typical
first word of such a writ; properly 2nd person singular present subjunctive of capere to catch,
seize, hold (see capable).


talesman (n.)

reserve member of a jury, 1670s, from tales writ ordering bystanders to serve in place of jurors not
in attendance (late 15c.), via Anglo-French (mid-13c.), from Latin tales (in tales de
circumstantibus such persons from those standing about, a clause featured in such a writ), noun use
of plural of talis such, of such kind (see that).


venire

1660s, elliptical for venire facias (mid-15c.), Latin, literally that you cause to come, formerly
the first words in a writ to a sheriff to summon a jury. See venue.


ca.sa.

abbreviation of Latin capias ad satisfaciendum, a writ issued upon a judgment in a personal action
for the recovery of money  (see capias).


supersedeas (n.)

writ to stay legal proceedings, Latin, literally you shall desist, second person singular present
subjunctive of supersedere desist, refrain from, forebear (see supersede).


mandamus (n.)

1530s, writ from a superior court to an inferior one, specifying that something be done, (late 14c.
in Anglo-French), from Latin, literally we order, first person plural present indicative of mandare
to order (see mandate (n.)).


amendment (n.)

early 13c., betterment, improvement; c.1300, of persons, correction, reformation, from Old French
amendment, from amender (see amend). Sense expanded to include correction of error in a legal
process (c.1600) and alteration of a writ or bill to remove its faults (1690s).


praecipe (n.)

c.1500 (in Magna Carta in Anglo-Latin), from Latin praecipe, imperative of praecipere to admonish,
enjoin, from the opening words of such a writ, praecipe quod reddat enjoin (him) that he render.


libel (n.)

c.1300, formal written statement, especially, in civil law, plaintiff's statement of charges (mid-
14c.); from Old French libelle (fem.) small book; (legal) charge, claim; writ; written report
(13c.), from Latin libellus a little book, pamphlet; petition, written accusation, complaint,
diminutive of liber book (see library). Broader sense of any published or written statement likely
to harm a person's reputation is first attested 1630s.


alive (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English on life in living. The fuller form on live was still current 17c. Alive and
kicking alert, vigorous, attested from 1859; The allusion is to a child in the womb after quickening
[Farmer]. Used emphatically, especially with man; as in:    [A]bout a thousand gentlemen having
bought his almanacks for this year, merely to find what he said against me, at every line they read
they would lift up their eyes, and cry out betwixt rage and laughter, they were sure no man alive
ever writ such damned stuff as this. [Jonathan Swift, Bickerstaff's Vindication, 1709]    Thus
abstracted as an expletive, man alive! (1845).


subpoena (n.)

early 15c., sub pena, from Medieval Latin sub poena under penalty, the first words of the writ
commanding the presence of someone under penalty of failure, from Latin sub under (see sub-) +
poena, ablative of poena penalty (see penal). The verb is attested from 1630s.


behemoth (n.)

late 14c., huge biblical beast (Job xl:15), from Latin behemoth, from Hebrew b'hemoth, usually taken
as plural of intensity of b'hemah beast. But the Hebrew word is perhaps a folk etymology of Egyptian
pehemau, literally water-ox, the name for the hippopotamus.    Long before Jumbo was dreamed of, a
hippo was exhibited by George K. Bailey, who invented the tank on wheels now used so generally in
the circuses. The beast was advertised as the blood sweating Behemoth of Holy Writ, and he made
several men rich. [Isaac F. Marcosson, Sawdust and Gold Dust, in The Bookman, June 1910]


habeas corpus (n.)

writ requiring a person to be brought before a court, mid-15c., Latin, literally (you should) have
the person, in phrase habeas corpus ad subjiciendum produce or have the person to be subjected to
(examination), opening words of writs in 14c. Anglo-French documents to require a person to be
brought before a court or judge, especially to determine if that person is being legally detained.
From habeas, second person singular present subjunctive of habere to have, to hold (see habit (n.))
+ corpus person, literally body (see corporeal). In reference to more than one person, habeas
corpora.


critic (n.)

1580s, one who passes judgment, from Middle French critique (14c.), from Latin criticus a judge,
literary critic, from Greek kritikos able to make judgments, from krinein to separate, decide (see
crisis). Meaning one who judges merits of books, plays, etc. is from c.1600. The English word always
had overtones of censurer, faultfinder.     To understand how the artist felt, however, is not
criticism; criticism is an investigation of what the work is good for. ... Criticism ... is a
serious and public function; it shows the race assimilating the individual, dividing the immortal
from the mortal part of a soul. [George Santayana, The Life of Reason, 1906]   <hr />   A perfect
judge will read each work of wit   With the same spirit that its author writ;  [Pope, An Essay on
Criticism, 1709]


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


serve (v.)

late 12c., to render habitual obedience to, also minister, give aid, give help, from Old French
servir to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with, from
Latin servire be a servant, be in service, be enslaved; figuratively be devoted; be governed by;
comply with; conform; flatter, originally be a slave, related to servus slave, perhaps from Etruscan
(compare Etruscan proper names Servi, Serve, Latinized as Servius).    By c.1200 also as to be in
the service of, perform a service for; attend upon, be personal servant to; be a slave; owe
allegiance to; officiate at Mass or other religious rites; from early 13c. as set food at table;
mid-14c. as to wait on (customers). From late 14c. as treat (someone or something) in some fashion.
To serve (someone) right to treat as he deserves is recorded from 1580s.    He no schuld neuer wond
To seruen him fro fot to hond  [Amis and Amiloun, c.1330]    Sense of be useful, be beneficial, be
suitable for a purpose or function is from early 14c.; that of take the place or meet the needs of,
be equal to the task is from late 14c.; that of suffice is from mid-15c. Meaning render active
military service is from 1510s. Sporting sense, in tennis, badminton, etc., first recorded 1580s.
Legal sense present (a writ, warrant,etc.), give legal notice of is from early 15c.


Valentine (n.)

mid-15c., sweetheart chosen on St. Valentine's Day, from Late Latin Valentinus, the name of two
early Italian saints (from Latin valentia strength, capacity; see valence). Choosing a sweetheart on
this day originated 14c. as a custom in English and French court circles. Meaning letter or card
sent to a sweetheart first recorded 1824. The romantic association of the day is said to be from it
being around the time when birds choose their mates.    For this was on seynt Volantynys day  Whan
euery bryd cometh there to chese his make.  [Chaucer, Parlement of Foules, c.1381]    Probably the
date was the informal first day of spring in whatever French region invented the custom (many
surviving medieval calendars reckon the start of spring on the 7th or 22nd of February). No evidence
connects it with the Roman Lupercalia (an 18c. theory) or to any romantic or avian quality in either
of the saints. The custom of sending special cards or letters on this date flourished in England
c.1840-1870, declined around the turn of the 20th century, and revived 1920s.    To speak of the
particular Customs of the English Britons, I shall begin with Valentine's Day, Feb. 14. when young
Men and Maidens get their several Names writ down upon Scrolls of Paper rolled up, and lay 'em
asunder, the Men drawing the Maidens Names, and these the Mens; upon which, the Men salute their
chosen Valentines and present them with Gloves, &amp;c.; This Custom (which sometimes introduces a
Match) is grounded upon the Instinct of Animals, which about this Time of the Year, feeling a new
Heat by the approach of the Sun, begin to couple. [The Present State of Great Britain and Ireland
London, 1723]


