writhe (v.)

Old English wri&eth;an (transitive) to twist or bend, earlier to bind or fetter, from Proto-Germanic
*writhanan (cognates: North Frisian wrial, Old High German ridan, Old Norse ri&eth;a, Middle Swedish
vri&thorn;a, Middle Danish vride), from PIE *wreit- to turn, bend (see wreath). Intransitive, of the
body or limbs, move in a twisting or tortuous manner, from c.1300. Related: Writhed; writhing.


wreathe (v.)

1520s (transitive), a back-formation from wrethen, Middle English past participle of writhe.
Intransitive sense from 1580s. Related: Wreathed; wreathing.


squirm (v.)

1690s, originally referring to eels, of unknown origin; sometimes associated with worm or swarm, but
perhaps imitative. Figurative sense to be painfully affected, to writhe inside is from 1804.
Related: Squirmed; squirming. As a noun from 1839.


throe (n.)

c.1200, throwe pain, pang of childbirth, agony of death, of uncertain origin, possibly from Old
English &thorn;rawan twist, turn, writhe (see throw (v.)), or altered from Old English &thorn;rea
(genitive &thorn;rawe) affliction, pang, evil; threat, persecution (related to &thorn;rowian to
suffer), from Proto-Germanic *thrawo (cognates: Middle High German dro threat, German drohen to
threaten). Modern spelling first recorded 1610s. Related: Throes.


toil (n.1)

hard work, c.1300, originally turmoil, contention, dispute, from Anglo-French toil (13c.), from
toiler agitate, stir up, entangle, writhe about, from Old French toeillier drag about, make dirty
(12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare crush with a small hammer, from tudicula mill for
crushing olives, instrument for crushing, from Latin tudes hammer, from PIE *tud-, variant of
*(s)teu- to push, stroke, knock, beat (see obtuse). Sense of hard work, labor (1590s) is from the
related verb (see toil (v.)).


wrench (v.)

Old English wrencan to twist, from Proto-Germanic *wrankjan (cognates: Old High German renken,
German renken to twist, wrench, Old English wringan to wring), from PIE *wreng- to turn (cognates:
Sanskrit vrnakti turns, twists, Lithuanian rengtis to grow crooked, to writhe), nasalized variant of
*werg- to turn (cognates: Latin vergere to turn, tend toward), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend
(see versus). Related: Wrenched, wrenching.


spin (v.)

Old English spinnan (transitive) draw out and twist fibers into thread, strong verb (past tense
spann, past participle spunnen), from Proto-Germanic *spenwan (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian
spinna, Danish spinde, Dutch spinnen, Old High German spinnan, German spinnen, Gothic spinnan), from
PIE *spen-wo-, from root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Armenian henum I weave; Greek
patos garment, literally that which is spun; Lithuanian pinu I plait, braid, spandau I spin; Middle
Welsh cy-ffiniden spider; see span (v.)).    Intransitive senses of to form threads from fibrous
stuff; to twist, writhe developed in late Old English. Transitive sense of cause to turn rapidly is
from 1610s; intransitive meaning revolve, turn around rapidly first recorded 1660s. Meaning attempt
to influence reporters' minds after an event has taken place but before they have written about it
seems to have risen to popularity in the 1984 U.S. presidential campaign; as in spin doctor, first
attested 1984.


throw (v.)

to project, propel, c.1300, from Old English &thorn;rawan to twist, turn, writhe, curl, (past tense
&thorn;reow, past participle &thorn;rawen), from Proto-Germanic *threw- (cognates: Old Saxon
thraian, Middle Dutch dr&aelig;yen, Dutch draaien, Old High German draen, German drehen to turn,
twist; not found in Scandinavian or Gothic), from PIE *tere- (1) to rub, turn, rub by turning, bore
(cognates: Sanskrit turah wounded, hurt, Greek teirein to rub, rub away, Latin terere to rub,
thresh, grind, wear away, Old Church Slavonic tiro to rub, Lithuanian trinu to rub, Old Irish
tarathar borer, Welsh taraw to strike).    Not the usual Old English word for to throw (weorpan,
related to warp (v.) was common in this sense). The sense evolution may be via the notion of
whirling a missile before throwing it. The sense of put by force (as in throw in jail) is first
recorded 1550s; that of confuse, flabbergast is from 1844; that of lose deliberately is from 1868.
To throw the book at (someone) is 1932, from notion of judge sentencing a criminal from a law book
full of possible punishments. To throw (one's) hat in the ring issue a challenge, especially to
announce one's candidacy, first recorded 1917. To throw up vomit is first recorded 1732. To throw
(someone) off confuse by a false scent is from 1891.


