wrought (adj.)

mid-13c., from past participle of Middle English werken (see work (v.)). Wrought iron (1703) is that
which is malleable and has been brought into some form.


bloom (n.2)

rough mass of wrought iron, from Old English bloma lump of metal; mass, of unknown origin. Identical
in form to bloom (n.1), and sometimes regarded as a secondary sense of it, but evidence of a
connection is wanting.


overwrought (adj.)

worked up to too high a pitch, 1825, literally over-worked, from over- + wrought. Earlier it meant
exhausted by work (1660s) as a literal past participle of overwork.


rupee (n.)

Indian coin, 1610s, from Hindi or Urdu rupiyah, from Sanskrit rupyah wrought silver, perhaps
originally something provided with an image, a coin, from rupah shape, likeness, image.


daedal (adj.)

1580s, skillful, cunning, from Latin daedalus, from Greek daidalos skillful, cunningly wrought. Also
an anglicized form of the name Daedalus from Greek mythology (1610s).


pyrogen (n.)

1858, as a proposed word for electricity, from pyro- + -gen. Meaning fever-producer is from 1896.
Related: Pyrogenic; pyrogenetic. Greek pyrogenes meant born in fire, wrought by fire.


textile (n.)

1620s, from Latin textilis a web, canvas, woven fabric, cloth, something woven, noun use of textilis
woven, wrought, from texere to weave, from PIE root *teks- to make (see texture (n.)). As an
adjective from 1650s.


doughface (n.)

contemptuous nickname in U.S. politics for Northern Democrats who worked in the interest of the
South before the Civil War; it was taken to mean man who allows himself to be moulded. The source is
an 1820 speech by John Randolph of Roanoke, in the wake of the Missouri Compromise.    Randolph,
mocking the northerners intimidated by the South, referred to a children's game in which the players
daubed their faces with dough and then looked in a mirror and scared themselves. [Daniel Walker
Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007]   Mask of dough is recorded from 1809, and the same image
Randolph used is attested in another context by 1833.


energy (n.)

1590s, force of expression, from Middle French &eacute;nergie (16c.), from Late Latin energia, from
Greek energeia activity, operation, from energos active, working, from en at (see en- (2)) + ergon
work, that which is wrought; business; action (see organ).    Used by Aristotle with a sense of
force of expression; broader meaning of power is first recorded in English 1660s. Scientific use is
from 1807. Energy crisis first attested 1970.


exquisite (adj.)

early 15c., carefully selected, from Latin exquisitus carefully sought out, thus, choice, from past
participle of exquirere search out thoroughly, from ex- out (see ex-) + quaerere to seek (see query
(v.)).    Of any thing (good or bad, torture as well as art) brought to a highly wrought condition,
sometimes shading into disapproval. A vogue word 15c.-18c., given wide extensions of meaning, none
of which survives. The main modern sense of of consummate and delightful excellence is first
attested 1579, in Lyly's Euphues. Related: Exquisitely; exquisiteness. The noun meaning a dandy, fop
is from 1819.


type (n.)

late 15c., symbol, emblem, from Latin typus figure, image, form, kind, from Greek typos a blow,
dent, impression, mark, effect of a blow; figure in relief, image, statue; anything wrought of metal
or stone; general form, character; outline, sketch, from root of typtein to strike, beat, from PIE
*tup-, variant of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Extended 1713
to printing blocks with letters carved on them in relief. The meaning general form or character of
some kind, class is attested in English from 1843, though it had that sense in Latin and Greek. To
be (someone's) type be the sort of person that person is attracted to is recorded from 1934.


rum (n.)

liquor from sugar cane or molasses, 1650s, shortening of rumbullion (1651), rombostion (1652), of
uncertain origin, perhaps from rum (adj.).The chiefe fudling they make in the Island [i.e. Barbados]
is Rumbullion alias Kill-Devill, and this is made of suggar cane distilled, a hott, hellish and
terrible liquor. [A briefe Description of the Island of Barbados, 1651]The English word was borrowed
into Dutch, German, Swedish, Danish, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, and Russian. Used since
1800 in North America as a general (hostile) name for intoxicating liquors.    Rum I take to be the
name which unwashed moralists apply alike to the product distilled from molasses and the noblest
juices of the vineyard. Burgundy in all its sunset glow is rum. Champagne, soul of the foaming grape
of Eastern France, is rum. ... Sir, I repudiate the loathsome vulgarism as an insult to the first
miracle wrought by the Founder of our religion! [Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the
Breakfast-Table, 1891]


Shrewsbury

one of the most etymologically complex of English place names, it illustrates the changes wrought in
Old English words by Anglo-French scribes who could not pronounce them. Recorded 1016 as
Scrobbesbyrig, it originally may have meant the fortified place in (a district called) The Scrub.
The initial consonant cluster was impossible for the scribes, who simplified it to sr-, then added a
vowel (sar-) to make it easier still.    The name was also changed by Anglo-French loss or
metathesis of liquids in words containing -l-, -n-, or -r- (also evident in the derivatives of Old
French Berengier bear-spear -- Old High German Beringar -- name of one of the paladins in the
Charlemagne romances and a common given name in England 12c. and 13c., which has come down in
surnames as Berringer, Bellanger, Benger, etc.). Thus Sarop- became Salop- and in the 12c. and 13c.
the overwhelming spelling in government records was Salopesberie, which accounts for the
abbreviation Salop for the modern county.    During all this, the Anglo-Saxon inhabitants (as
opposed to the French scribes) still pronounced it properly, and regular sound evolutions probably
produced a pronunciation something like Shrobesbury (which turns up on a 1327 patent roll). After a
predictable -b- to -v- (a vowel in the Middle Ages) to -u- shift, the modern spelling begins to
emerge 14c. and is fully established 15c.   Shrewsbury clock, for some reason, became proverbial for
exactness, and thus, naturally, proverbial as indicating exaggeration of accuracy (1590s).


Whig

British political party, 1657, in part perhaps a disparaging use of whigg a country bumpkin (1640s);
but mainly a shortened form of Whiggamore (1649) one of the adherents of the Presbyterian cause in
western Scotland who marched on Edinburgh in 1648 to oppose Charles I. Perhaps originally a horse
drover, from dialectal verb whig to urge forward + mare. In 1689 the name was first used in
reference to members of the British political party that opposed the Tories. American Revolution
sense of colonist who opposes Crown policies is from 1768. Later it was applied to opponents of
Andrew Jackson (as early as 1825), and taken as the name of a political party (1834) that merged
into the Republican Party in 1854-56.    [I]n the spring of 1834 Jackson's opponents adopted the
name Whig, traditional term for critics of executive usurpations. James Watson Webb, editor of the
New York Courier and Enquirer, encouraged use of the name. [Henry] Clay gave it national currency in
a speech on April 14, 1834, likening the whigs of the present day to those who had resisted George
III, and by summer it was official. [Daniel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007, p.390]   Whig
historian is recorded from 1924. Whig history is the tendency in many historians ... to emphasise
certain principles of progress in the past and to produce a story which is the ratification if not
the glorification of the present. [Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History, 1931]


