yeomanry (n.)

yeomen collectively, late 14c., from yeoman + -ry.


yeoman (n.)

c.1300, attendant in a noble household, of unknown origin, perhaps a contraction of Old English
iunge man young man, or from an unrecorded Old English *geaman, equivalent of Old Frisian gaman
villager, from Old English -gea district, region, village, cognate with Old Frisian ga, ge, German
Gau, Gothic gawi, from Proto-Germanic *gaujan.    Sense of commoner who cultivates his land is
recorded from early 15c.; also the third order of fighting men (late 14c., below knights and
squires, above knaves), hence yeomen's service good, efficient service (c.1600). Meaning naval petty
officer in charge of supplies is first attested 1660s. Yeowoman first recorded 1852: Then I am yeo-
woman O the clumsy word! [Tennyson, The Foresters]


gau (n.)

ancient German territorial and administrative division, originally comprising several villages,
surviving in place names such as Breisgau and Oberammergau; also in gauleiter (from leiter leader),
title of the local political leaders under the Nazi system. Compare the first element in yeoman.


Christopher

masc. proper name, Church Latin Christophoros, from Ecclesiastical Greek khristophoros, literally
Christ-bearing; from phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). In medieval legend he was a
giant (one of the rare virtuous ones) who aided travellers by carrying them across a river.
Medallions with his image worn by travellers are known from the Middle Ages (Chaucer's Yeoman had
one). Not a common name in medieval England.


Surrey

Old English su&thorn;rige (722), literally Southerly District (relative to Middlesex), from
su&eth;er, from su&eth; (see south) + -ge district (see yeoman). Bede and others use it as a folk-
name, as if People from Surrey. Meaning two-seated, four-wheeled pleasure carriage is from 1895,
short for Surrey cart, an English pleasure cart (introduced in U.S. 1872), named for Surrey,
England, where it first was made.


boor (n.)

13c., from Old French bovier herdsman, from Latin bovis, genitive of bos cow, ox. Re-introduced 16c.
from Dutch boer, from Middle Dutch gheboer fellow dweller, from Proto-Germanic *buram dweller,
especially farmer, from PIE *bhu-, from root *bheue- (see be). Original meaning was peasant farmer
(compare German Bauer, Dutch boer, Danish bonde), and in English it was at first applied to
agricultural laborers in or from other lands, as opposed to the native yeoman; negative connotation
attested by 1560s (in boorish), from notion of clownish rustics. Related: Boorishness.


