yield (n.)

Old English gield payment, sum of money; service, offering, worship; from the source of yield (v.).
Extended sense of production (as of crops) is first attested mid-15c. Earliest English sense
survives in financial yield from investments.


yielding (adj.)

late 14c., generous in rewarding, present participle adjective from yield (v.). From 1660s as giving
way to physical force.


yield (v.)

Old English gieldan (West Saxon), geldan (Anglian) to pay, pay for; reward, render; worship, serve,
sacrifice to (class III strong verb; past tense geald, past participle golden), from Proto-Germanic
*geldan pay (cognates: Old Saxon geldan to be worth, Old Norse gjaldo to repay, return, Middle Dutch
ghelden, Dutch gelden to cost, be worth, concern, Old High German geltan, German gelten to be worth,
Gothic fra-gildan to repay, requite).    From PIE *gheldh- to pay, a root found only in Balto-Slavic
and Germanic (and Old Church Slavonic &#382;ledo, Lithuanian geliuoti might be Germanic loan-words).
[T]he only generally surviving senses on the Continent are 'to be worth; to be valid, to concern,
apply to,' which are not represented at all in the English word [OED]; sense development in English
comes via use of this word to translate Latin reddere, French rendre. Sense of give in return for
labor or capital invested is from early 14c. Intransitive sense of give oneself up, submit,
surrender (to a foe) is from c.1300. Related to Middle Low German and Middle Dutch gelt, Dutch geld,
German Geld money. Related: Yielded; yielding.


vintage (n.)

early 15c., harvest of grapes, yield of wine from a vineyard, from Anglo-French vintage (mid-14c.),
from Old French vendage, vendenge vine-harvest, yield from a vineyard, from Latin vindemia a
gathering of grapes, yield of grapes, from comb. form of vinum wine (see wine (n.)) + stem of demere
take off (from de- from, away from + emere to take; see exempt). Sense shifted to age or year of a
particular wine (1746), then to a general adjectival sense of being of an earlier time (1883). Used
of cars since 1928.


submit (v.)

late 14c., to place (oneself) under the control of another, to yield oneself, from Latin submittere
to yield, lower, let down, put under, reduce, from sub under (see sub-) + mittere let go, send (see
mission). Transitive sense of refer to another for consideration first recorded 1550s. Related:
Submitted; submitting.


defer (v.2)

yield, mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;f&eacute;rer (14c.) to yield, comply, from Latin
deferre carry away, transfer, grant, from de- down, away (see de-) + ferre carry (see infer). Main
modern sense is from meaning refer (a matter) to someone, which also was in Latin.


condescend (adj.)

mid-14c., to yield deferentially, from Old French condescendere (14c.) to agree, consent, give in,
yield, from Late Latin condescendere to let oneself down, from Latin com- together (see com-) +
descendere descend (see descend). Sense of to sink willingly to equal terms with inferiors is from
mid-15c.


cede (v.)

1630s, from French c&#233;der or directly from Latin cedere to yield, give place; to give up some
right or property, originally to go from, proceed, leave, from Proto-Italic *kesd-o- to go away,
avoid, from PIE root *sed- (2) to go, yield (cognates: Sanskrit sedhati to drive; chase away;
Avestan apa-had- turn aside, step aside; Greek hodos way, hodites wanderer, wayfarer; Old Church
Slavonic chodu a walking, going, choditi to go). Related: Ceded; ceding. The sense evolution in
Latin is via the notion of to go away, withdraw, give ground.


recreant (adj.)

c.1300, confessing oneself to be overcome or vanquished, from Old French recreant defeated,
vanquished, yielding, giving; weak, exhausted; cowardly, present participle adjective from recroire
to yield in a trial by combat, surrender allegiance, literally believe again; perhaps on notion of
take back one's pledge, yield one's cause, from re- again, back (see re-) + croire entrust, believe,
from Latin credere (see credo).Non sufficit ... nisi dicat illud verbum odiosum, quod recreantus
sit. [Bracton, c.1260]Meaning cowardly in English is from late 14c. Meaning unfaithful to duty is
from 1640s.


give (v.)

Old English giefan (West Saxon) to give, bestow; allot, grant; commit, devote, entrust, class V
strong verb (past tense geaf, past participle giefen), from Proto-Germanic *geban (cognates: Old
Frisian jeva, Middle Dutch gheven, Dutch geven, Old High German geban, German geben, Gothic giban),
from PIE *ghabh- to take, hold, have, give (see habit). It became yiven in Middle English, but
changed to guttural g by influence of Old Norse gefa to give, Old Danish giv&aelig;. Meaning to
yield to pressure is from 1570s.   Give in yield is from 1610s; give out is mid-14c., publish,
announce; meaning run out, break down is from 1520s. Give up surrender is mid-12c. To give (someone)
a cold seems to reflect the old belief that one could be cured of disease by deliberately infecting
others. What gives? what is happening? is attested from 1940. Give-and-take (n.) is originally from
horse racing (1769) and refers to races in which bigger horses were given more weight to carry,
lighter ones less. General sense attested by 1778.


unyielding (adj.)

1590s of persons; 1650s, of substances; from un- (1) not + yielding (see yield (v.)).


blende (n.)

an ore of zinc, 1680s, from German Blende, a back-formation from blenden to blind, deceive (see
blind (adj.)). So called because it resembles lead but does not yield any.


crinkle (v.)

late 14c., from frequentative of Old English crincan, variant of cringan to bend, yield (see
cringe). Related: Crinkled; crinkling. As a noun from 1590s.


rendition (n.)

c.1600, surrender of a place or possession, from obsolete French rendition a rendering, noun of
action from Old French rendre to deliver, to yield (see render (v.)). Meaning translation first
recorded 1650s; that of an acting, a performing first recorded 1858, American English.


redwood (n.)

1610s, wood that has a red hue, from red (adj.1) + wood (n.). Of various types of New World trees
that yield such wood, from 1716; specifically of the California Sequoia sempervirens from 1819. In
Scottish English 16c.-18c. the same word as an adjective meant completely deranged, raving, stark
mad, from wood (adj.).


last-ditch (adj.)

on the last line of defense, 1715, attributed to William of Orange; if so, originally in a Dutch
context.    We have no space to enter into the detail of the heroic struggle maintained by the young
stadtholder and his faithful Dutchmen; how they laid their country under water, and successfully
kept the powerful invader at bay. Once the contest seemed utterly hopeless. William was advised to
compromise the matter, and yield up Holland as the conquest of Louis XIV. No, replied he; I mean to
die in the last ditch. A speech alone sufficient to render his memory immortal. [Agnes Strickland,
Lives of the Queens of England, London, 1847]


cession (n.)

late 14c., a relinquishing, from Old French cession cession; death (13c.), from Latin cessionem
(nominative cessio) a giving up, surrendering, noun of action from past participle stem of cedere to
go away, yield (see cede). Related: Cessionary.


felicity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French felicite (14c.) happiness, from Latin felicitatem (nominative felicitas)
happiness, fertility, from felix (genitive felicis) happy, fortunate, fruitful, fertile, from Latin
root *fe-, equivalent of PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, produce, yield (see fecund).


concede (v.)

1630s, from Middle French conc&eacute;der or directly from Latin concedere give way, yield, go away,
depart, retire, figuratively agree, consent, give precedence, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + cedere to go, grant, give way (see cede). Related: Conceded; conceding.


capitulate (v.)

1570s, to draw up in chapters (i.e., under heads), in part a back-formation from capitulation, in
part from Medieval Latin capitulatus, past participle of capitulare to draw up in heads or chapters,
arrange conditions. Often of terms of surrender, hence meaning to yield on stipulated terms (1680s).
Related: Capitulated; capitulating.


necessary (adj.)

late 14c. needed, required, essential, indispensable, from Old French necessaire necessary, urgent,
compelling (13c.), and directly from Latin necessarius unavoidable, indispensable, necessary, from
necesse unavoidable, indispensable, originally no backing away, from ne- not + cedere to withdraw,
go away, yield (see cede). The root sense is of that from which there is no evasion, that which is
inevitable. Necessary house privy is from c.1600. Necessary evil is from 1540s (the original
reference was to woman).


cave (v.)

early 15c., caven, to hollow something out, from cave (n.). Modern sense to collapse in or down is
1707, American English, presumably from East Anglian dialectal calve collapse, fall in, perhaps from
Flemish; subsequently influenced by cave (n.). Transitive sense by 1762. Related: Caved; caving.
Figurative sense of yield to pressure is from 1837.


cease (v.)

c.1300, cesen, from Old French cesser to come to an end, stop, cease; give up, desist, from Latin
cessare to cease, go slow, give over, leave off, be idle, frequentative of cedere (past participle
cessus) go away, withdraw, yield (see cede). Related: Ceased; ceasing. Old English in this sense had
geswican, blinnan.


merit (v.)

late 15c., to be entitled to, from Middle French meriter (Modern French m&#233;riter), from merite
(n.), or directly from Latin meritare to earn, yield, frequentative of mereri to earn (money); also
to serve as a soldier (see merit (n.)). Related: Merited; meriting.


antecedent

late 14c. (n. and adj.), from Old French antecedent (14c.) or directly from Latin antecedentem
(nominative antecedens), present participle of antecedere go before, precede, from ante- before (see
ante) + cedere to yield (see cede). Used as a noun in Latin philosophical writings.


geld (n.)

royal tax in medieval England, Old English gield payment, tribute, from Proto-Germanic *geldam
payment (cognates: Middle High German gelt payment, contribution, German geld money, Old Norse gjald
payment, Gothic gild tribute, tax), from PIE root of yield (v.).


return (n.)

late 14c., act of coming back, also official report of election results, from Anglo-French retorn,
Old French retorne, verbal noun from retorner (see return (v.)). In ball games from 1833;
specifically in tennis from 1886. Meaning a yield, a profit is recorded from 1620s. Meaning a thing
sent back is from 1875. Many happy returns of the day was used by Addison (1716). Mailing return
address attested from 1884.


addict (v.)

1530s (implied in addicted), from Latin addictus, past participle of addicere to deliver, award,
yield; give assent, make over, sell, figuratively to devote, consecrate; sacrifice, sell out, betray
from ad- to (see ad-) + dicere say, declare (see diction), but also adjudge, allot. Earlier in
English as an adjective, delivered, devoted (1520s). Related: Addicted; addicting.


succumb (v.)

late 15c., from Old French succomber succumb, die, lose one's (legal) case, and directly from Latin
succumbere submit, surrender, yield, be overcome; sink down; lie under; cohabit with, from sub down
(see sub-) + -cumbere take a reclining position, related to cubare lie down (see cubicle).
Originally transitive; sense of sink under pressure is first recorded c.1600. As a euphemism for to
die, from 1849. Related: Succumbed; succumbing.


wicker (n.)

mid-14c., wickerwork, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish viger, Middle Swedish viker willow,
willow branch), from Proto-Germanic *wik- (cognates: Old Norse vikja to move, turn, Swedish vika to
bend, Old English wican to give way, yield), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, twine (see weak). The
notion is of pliant twigs. As an adjective, made of wicker, from c.1500.


temporize (v.)

to comply with the times; to yield ostensibly to the current of opinion or circumstances, 1550s
(implied in temporizer), from Middle French temporiser to pass one's time, wait one's time (14c.),
from Medieval Latin temporizare pass time, perhaps via Vulgar Latin *temporare to delay, from Latin
tempus (genitive temporis) time (see temporal). Related: Temporized; temporizing.


submission (n.)

late 14c., act of referring to a third party for judgment or decision, from Old French submission or
directly from Latin submissionem (nominative submissio) a lowering, letting down; sinking, noun of
action from past participle stem of submittere to let down, put down, lower, reduce, yield (see
submit).    Sense of humble obedience is first recorded mid-15c. Modern French submission has been
replaced by doublet soumission. English in 16c.-17c. also had an adjective submiss humble,
submissive.  Submissionist in various political historical contexts is from 1828.


Y

a late-developing letter in English. Called ipsilon in German, upsilon in Greek, the English name is
of obscure origin. The sound at the beginning of yard, yes, yield, etc. is from Old English words
with initial g- as in got and y- as in yet, which were considered the same sound and often
transcribed as &#540;, known as yogh. The system was altered by French scribes, who brought over the
continental use of -g- and from the early 1200s used -y- and sometimes -gh- to replace &#540;. As
short for YMCA, etc., by 1915.


spare (v.)

Old English sparian to refrain from harming, be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly, from
the source of Old English sp&aelig;r sparing, frugal, from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (cognates: Old
Saxon sparon, Old Frisian sparia, Old Norse spara, Dutch sparen, Old High German sparon, German
sparen to spare). Meaning to dispense from one's own stock, give or yield up, is recorded from early
13c. Related: Spared; sparing.


exceed (v.)

late 14c., from Old French exceder (14c.) exceed, surpass, go too far, from Latin excedere depart,
go beyond, be in excess, surpass, from ex- out (see ex-) + cedere go, yield (see cede). Related:
Exceeded; exceeding. Exceedingly (late 15c.) means very greatly or very much; excessively (mid-15c.)
means too greatly or too much.


vicarious (adj.)

1630s, taking the place of another, from Latin vicarius that supplies a place; substituted,
delegated, from vicis a change, exchange, interchange; succession, alternation, substitution, from
PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (cognates: Sanskrit visti changing, changeable; Old English wician
to give way, yield, wice wych elm; Old Norse vikja to bend, turn; Swedish viker willow twig, wand;
German wechsel change).    From 1690s as done or experienced in place of another (usually in
reference to punishment, often of Christ); from 1929 as experienced imaginatively through another.
Related: Vicariously.


wicket (n.)

early 13c., small door or gate, especially one forming part of a larger one, from Anglo-French
wiket, Old North French wiket (Old French guichet, Norman viquet) small door, wicket, wicket gate,
probably from Proto-Germanic *wik- (cognates: Old Norse vik nook, Old English wican to give way,
yield), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (see weak). The notion is of something that turns.
Cricket sense of set of three sticks defended by the batsman is recorded from 1733; hence many
figurative phrases in British English.


scarf (n.1)

band of silk, strip of cloth, 1550s, a band worn across the body or over the shoulders, probably
from Old North French escarpe sash, sling, which probably is identical with Old French escherpe
pilgrim's purse suspended from the neck, perhaps from Frankish *skirpja or some other Germanic
source (compare Old Norse skreppa small bag, wallet, satchel), or from Medieval Latin scirpa little
bag woven of rushes, from Latin scirpus rush, bulrush, of unknown origin [Klein]. As a cold-weather
covering for the neck, first recorded 1844. Plural scarfs began to yield to scarves early 18c., on
model of half/halves, etc.


deliver (v.)

c.1200, save, rescue, set free, liberate, from Old French delivrer to set free; remove; save,
preserve; hand over (goods), also used of childbirth, from Late Latin deliberare, from de- away (see
de-) + Latin liberare to free (see liberal (adj.)).    Childbirth sense in English, to bring (a
woman) to childbirth, is from c.1300. Sense of hand over, give, give up, yield is c.1300. in
English, which brings it in opposition to its root. Meaning project, throw is 1590s. Related:
Delivered; delivering.


rapport (n.)

1660s, reference, relation, relationship, from French rapport bearing, yield, produce; harmony,
agreement, intercourse, back-formation from rapporter bring back; refer to, from re- again (see re-)
+ apporter to bring, from Latin apportare to bring, from ad- to (see ad-) + portare to carry (see
port (n.1)).    Psychological meaning intense harmonious accord, as between therapist and patient,
is first attested 1894, though the word had been used in a very similar sense with reference to
mesmerism from 1845 (first recorded in Poe). See also report (n.). Johnson frowns on the word and
credits its use in English to Sir William Temple, naturalizer of French terms, who did use it but
was not the first to do so.


waterlogged (adj.)

1759 (in an account of the Battle of Lagos in Universal Magazine, September), from water (n.1) + log
(n.); the notion apparently is of reduce to a log-like condition.     WATER LOGGED, the state of a
ship when, by receiving a great quantity of water into her hold, by leaking, &amp;c.;, she has
become heavy and inactive upon the sea, so as to yield without resistance to the efforts of every
wave rushing over her decks. As, in this dangerous situation, the center of gravity is no longer
fixed, but fluctuating from place to place, the stability of the ship is utterly lost. She is
therefore almost totally deprived of the use of her sails, which would operate to overset her, or
press the head under water. Hence there is no resource for the crew, except to free her by the
pumps, or to abandon her by the boats as soon as possible. [William Falconer, An Universal
Dictionary of the Marine, London, 1784]    The verb waterlog (1779) appears to be a back-formation.


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


weak (adj.)

c.1300, from Old Norse veikr weak, cognate with Old English wac weak, pliant, soft, from Proto-
Germanic *waikwa- yield (cognates: Old Saxon wek, Swedish vek, Middle Dutch weec, Dutch week weak,
soft, tender, Old High German weih yielding, soft, German weich soft), from PIE root *weik- (4) to
bend, wind (see vicarious).    Sense of lacking authority is first recorded early 15c.; that of
lacking moral strength late 14c. In grammar, denoting a verb inflected by regular syllabic addition
rather than by change of the radical vowel, from 1833. Related: Weakly. Weak-kneed wanting in
resolve is from 1870.


crank (n.)

handle for turning a revolving axis, Old English *cranc, implied in crancst&aelig;f a weaver's
instrument, crencestre female weaver, spinster, from Proto-Germanic base *krank-, and related to
crincan to bend, yield (see crinkle, cringe). English retains the literal sense of the ancient root,
while German and Dutch krank sick, formerly weak, small, is from a figurative use. The 1825
supplement to Jamieson's Scottish dictionary has crank infirm, weak, etc.    The sense of an
eccentric person, especially one who is irrationally fixated, is first recorded 1833, said to be
from the crank of a barrel organ, which makes it play the same tune over and over; but more likely a
back-formation from cranky (q.v.). Meaning methamphetamine attested by 1989.


render (v.)

late 14c., repeat, say again, from Old French rendre give back, present, yield (10c.), from Vulgar
Latin *rendere (formed by dissimilation or on analogy of its antonym, prendre to take), from Latin
reddere give back, return, restore, from red- back (see re-) + comb. form of dare to give (see date
(n.1)).    Meaning hand over, deliver is recorded from late 14c.; to return (thanks, a verdict,
etc.) is attested from late 15c.; meaning represent, depict is first attested 1590s. Irregular
retention of -er in a French verb in English is perhaps to avoid confusion with native rend (v.) or
by influence of a Middle English legalese noun render a payment of rent, from French noun use of the
infinitive. Related: Rendered; rendering.


pony (n.)

1650s, powny, from Scottish, apparently from obsolete French poulenet little foal (mid-15c.),
diminutive of Old French poulain foal, from Late Latin pullanus young of an animal, from Latin
pullus young of a horse, fowl, etc. (see foal (n.)) [Skeat's suggestion, still accepted].    German,
sensibly, indicates this animal by attaching a diminutive suffix to its word for horse, which might
yield Modern English *horslet. Modern French poney is a 19c. borrowing from English. Meaning crib of
a text as a cheating aid (1827) and small liquor glass (1849) both are from notion of smallness (the
former also something one rides). As the name of a popular dance, it dates from 1963. The U.S. Pony
Express began 1860 (and operated about 18 months before being superseded by the transcontinental
telegraph). The figurative one-trick pony is 1897, American English, in reference to circus acts.


abandon (v.)

late 14c., to give up, surrender (oneself or something), give over utterly; to yield (oneself)
utterly (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandoner (12c.), from adverbial phrase
&agrave; bandon at will, at discretion, from &agrave; at, to (see ad-) + bandon power, jurisdiction,
from Latin bannum, proclamation, from a Frankish word related to ban (v.).   Mettre sa forest
&agrave; bandon was a feudal law phrase in the 13th cent. = mettre sa for&ecirc;t &agrave;
permission, i.e. to open it freely to any one for pasture or to cut wood in; hence the later sense
of giving up one's rights for a time, letting go, leaving, abandoning. [Auguste Brachet, An
Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]
Etymologically, the word carries a sense of put someone under someone else's control. Meaning to
give up absolutely is from late 14c. Related: Abandoned; abandoning.


owe (v.)

Old English agan (past tense ahte) to have, own, from Proto-Germanic *aigan to possess (cognates:
Old Frisian aga, Old Norse eiga, Old High German eigan, Gothic aigan to possess, have), from PIE
*aik- to be master of, possess (cognates: Sanskrit ise he owns, isah owner, lord, ruler; Avestan is-
riches, isvan- well-off, rich).    Sense of to have to repay began in late Old English with the
phrase agan to geldanne literally to own to yield, which was used to translate Latin debere (earlier
in Old English this would have been sceal shall); by late 12c. the phrase had been shortened to
simply agan, and own (v.) took over this word's original sense.    An original Germanic preterite-
present verb (along with can (v.1), dare, may, etc.). New past tense form owed arose 15c. to replace
oughte, which developed into ought (v.).


case (n.1)

early 13c., what befalls one; state of affairs, from Old French cas an event, happening, situation,
quarrel, trial, from Latin casus a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap, literally a
falling, from cas-, past participle stem of cadere to fall, sink, settle down, decline, perish (used
widely: of the setting of heavenly bodies, the fall of Troy, suicides), from PIE root *kad- to lay
out, fall or make fall, yield, break up (cognates: Sanskrit sad- to fall down, Armenian chacnum to
fall, become low, perhaps also Middle Irish casar hail, lightning). The notion being that which
falls as that which happens (compare befall).    Meaning instance, example is from c.1300. Meaning
actual state of affairs is from c.1400. Given widespread extended and transferred senses in English
in law (16c.), medicine (18c.), etc.; the grammatical sense (late 14c.) was in Latin. U.S. slang
meaning person is from 1848. In case in the event is recorded from mid-14c. Case history is from
1879, originally medical; case study study of a particular case is from 1879, originally legal.


