yoke (v.)

Old English geocian to yoke, join together, from yoke (n.). Related: Yoked; yoking.


yoke (n.)

Old English geoc contrivance for fastening a pair of draft animals, earlier geoht pair of draft
animals (especially oxen), from Proto-Germanic *yukam (cognates: Old Saxon juk, Old Norse ok, Danish
aag, Middle Dutch joc, Dutch juk, Old High German joh, German joch, Gothic juk yoke), from PIE root
*yeug- to join (see jugular). Figurative sense of heavy burden, oppression, servitude was in Old
English.


jugular (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the throat or neck (especially in reference to the great veins of the neck),
from Modern Latin jugularis, from Latin iugulum collarbone, throat, neck, diminutive of iugum yoke,
related to iungere to join, from PIE *yeug- to join (cognates: Sanskrit yugam yoke, yunjati binds,
harnesses, yogah union; Hittite yugan yoke; Greek zygon yoke, zeugnyanai to join, unite; Old Church
Slavonic igo, Old Welsh iou yoke; Lithuanian jungas yoke, jungiu fastened in a yoke; Old English
geoc yoke; probably also Latin iuxta close by). As a noun, 1610s, from the adjective.


syzygy (n.)

conjunction or opposition of a heavenly body with the sun, 1650s, from Late Latin syzygia, from
Greek syzygia yoke of animals, pair, union of two, conjunction, from syzygein to yoke together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + zygon yoke (see jugular). Related: Syzygial;
Syzygiacal; Syzygetic.


yogh (n.)

Middle English letter (&#540;), c.1300; see Y. The name probably is identical with yoke (Middle
English yogh) and so called because yoke began with a yogh.


zygote (n.)

1880, coined 1878 by German cytologist Eduard Strasburger (1844-1912), the widespread attribution to
William Bateson being apparently erroneous; from Greek zygotos yoked, from zygon yoke (see jugular).


zeugma (n.)

1580s, a single word (usually a verb or adjective) made to refer to two or more nouns in a sentence
(but properly applying to only one of them), from Greek zeugma, a zeugma; that which is used for
joining; boat bridge, literally a yoking, from zeugnynai to yoke (see jugular).


slowpoke (n.)

also slow poke, 1848, American English from slow (adj.) + poke (n.3), the name of a device, like a
yoke with a pole, attached to domestic animals such as pigs and sheep to keep them from escaping
enclosures. Bartlett (1859) calls it a woman's word.


zygoma (n.)

bony arch of the cheek, plural zygomata, 1680s, Modern Latin, from Greek zygoma, from zygon yoke
(see jugular). So called because it connects the bones of the face with those of the skull about the
ear.


poke (n.3)

an act of poking, 1796, originally pugilistic slang, from poke (v.). Also (1809) the name of a
device, like a yoke with a pole, attached to domestic animals such as pigs and sheep to keep them
from escaping enclosures. Hence slowpoke, and compare pokey. Slang sense act of sexual intercourse
is attested from 1902.


conjugate (v.)

1520s, in grammatical sense; 1560s in literal sense, from Latin coniugatus, past participle of
coniugare to yoke together (see conjugal). Earlier as an adjective (late 15c.). Related: Conjugated;
conjugating.


inchoate (adj.)

1530s, from Latin inchoatus, past participle of inchoare, alteration of incohare to begin,
originally to hitch up, from in- on (see in- (2)) + cohum strap fastened to the oxen's yoke.
Related: Inchoative.


subjugation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin subiugationem (nominative subiugatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin subiugare to subdue, literally bring under the yoke, from sub under (see
sub-) + iugum (see jugular).


span (n.2)

two animals driven together, 1769, American English, from Dutch span, from spannen to stretch or
yoke, from Middle Dutch spannan, cognate with Old English spannan to join (see span (v.)). Also used
in South African English.


combine (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French combiner (14c.), from Late Latin combinare to unite, yoke together,
from Latin com- together (see com-) + bini two by two, adverb from bi- twice (see binary). Related:
Combinative; combined; combining.


conjugal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French conjugal (13c.), from Latin coniugalis relating to marriage, from coniunx
(genitive coniugis) spouse, related to coniugare to join together, from com- together (see com-) +
iugare to join, from iugum yoke (see jugular).


join (v.)

c.1300, from stem of Old French joindre join, connect, unite; have sexual intercourse with (12c.),
from Latin iungere to join together, unite, yoke, from PIE *yeug- to join, unite (see jugular).
Related: Joined; joining. In Middle English, join sometimes is short for enjoin. Join up enlist in
the army is from 1916. Phrase if you can't beat them, join them is from 1953.


juxtaposition (n.)

1660s, from French juxtaposition (1660s), from Latin iuxta beside, near + French position (see
position (n.)). Latin iuxta is a contraction of *iugista (adv.), superlative of adjective *iugos
closely connected, from stem of iugum yoke, from iungere to join (see jugular).


imperialism (n.)

1826, advocacy of empire, originally in a Napoleonic context, also of Rome and of British foreign
policy, from imperial + -ism. At times in British usage (and briefly in U.S.) with a neutral or
positive sense relating to national interests or the spread of the benefits of Western civilization,
but from the begining usually more or less a term of reproach. General sense of one country's rule
over another, first recorded 1878. Picked up disparagingly in Communist jargon by 1918.    It is the
old story of 1798, when French republicanism sick of its own folly and misdeeds, became
metamorphosed into imperialism, and consoled itself for its incapacity to found domestic freedom by
putting an iron yoke upon Europe, and covering it with blood and battle-fields. [Francis Lloyd, St.
James's Magazine, January 1842]


acre (n.)

Old English &aelig;cer tilled field, open land, from Proto-Germanic *akraz field, pasture (cognates:
Old Norse akr, Old Saxon akkar, Old Frisian ekker, Middle Dutch acker, Dutch akker, Old High German
achar, German acker, Gothic akrs), from PIE *agro- field (cognates: Latin ager field, land, Greek
agros, Sanskrit ajras plain, open country).    Originally in English without reference to dimension;
in late Old English the amount of land a yoke of oxen could plow in a day, afterward defined by
statute as a piece 40 poles by 4, or an equivalent shape (5 Edw. I, 31 Edw. III, 24 Hen. VIII).
Original sense retained in God's acre churchyard.


plow (n.)

late Old English plog, ploh plow; plowland (a measure of land equal to what a yoke of oxen could
plow in a day), possibly from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse plogr plow, Swedish and
Danish plog), from Proto-Germanic *plogo- (cognates: Old Saxon plog, Old Frisian ploch plow, Middle
Low German ploch, Middle Dutch ploech, Dutch ploeg, Old High German pfluog, German Pflug), a late
word in Germanic, of uncertain origin. Old Church Slavonic plugu, Lithuanian plugas plow are
Germanic loan-words, as probably is Latin plovus, plovum plow, a word said by Pliny to be of
Rhaetian origin.    Replaced Old English sulh, cognate with Latin sulcus furrow (see sulcus). As a
name for the star pattern also known as the Big Dipper or Charles's Wain, it is attested by early
15c., perhaps early 14c. The three handle stars (in the Dipper configuration) generally are seen as
the team of oxen pulling the plow, though sometimes they are the handle.


boy (n.)

mid-13c., boie servant, commoner, knave, boy, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie one
fettered, from Vulgar Latin *imboiare, from Latin boia leg iron, yoke, leather collar, from Greek
boeiai dorai ox hides. (Words for boy double as servant, attendant across the Indo-European map --
compare Italian ragazzo, French gar&ccedil;on, Greek pais, Middle English knave, Old Church Slavonic
otroku -- and often it is difficult to say which meaning came first.)    But it also appears to be
identical with East Frisian boi young gentleman, and perhaps with Dutch boef knave, from Middle
Dutch boeve, perhaps from Middle Low German buobe. This suggests a gradational relationship to babe.
For a different conjecture:    In Old English, only the proper name Boia has been recorded. ME boi
meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate
1400. ModE boy looks like a semantic blend of an onomatopoeic word for an evil spirit (*boi) and a
baby word for 'brother' (*bo). [Liberman]   <hr />   A noticable number of the modern words for
'boy', 'girl', and 'child' were originally colloquial nicknames, derogatory or whimsical, in part
endearing, and finally commonplace. These, as is natural, are of the most diverse, and in part
obscure, origin. [Buck]    Used slightingly of young men in Middle English; meaning male negro slave
or Asian personal servant of any age attested from c.1600. Exclamation oh, boy attested from 1892.


