zealous (adj.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin zelosus full of zeal (source of Italian zeloso, Spanish celoso), from
zelus (see zeal). Related: Zealously, zealousness.


zealot (n.)

early 14c., member of a militant 1st century Jewish sect which fiercely resisted the Romans in
Palestine, from Late Latin zelotes, from Greek zelotes one who is a zealous follower, from zeloun to
be zealous, from zelos zeal (see zeal). Extended sense of a fanatical enthusiast first recorded
1630s (earlier in this sense was zelator, mid-15c.).


zeal (n.)

passionate ardor in pursuit of an objective or course of action, late 14c., from Old French zel
(Modern French z&#232;le) and directly from Late Latin zelus zeal, emulation (source also of Italian
zelo, Spanish celo), a Church word, from Greek zelos ardor, eager rivalry, emulation, a noble
passion [Liddell &amp; Scott], but also jealousy; prom PIE *ya- to seek, request, desire. From mid-
15c. as devotion.


zealotry (n.)

excessive or undue zeal, fanaticism, 1650s, from zealot + -ry.


alacrity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin alacritatem (nominative alacritas) liveliness, ardor, eagerness, from alacer
(genitive alacris) cheerful, brisk, lively; of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with Gothic aljan
zeal, Old English ellen courage, zeal, strength, Old High German ellian.


jealous (adj.)

c.1200, gelus, later jelus (early 14c.), possessive and suspicious, originally in the context of
sexuality or romance; in general use late 14c.; also in a more positive sense, fond, amorous,
ardent, from c.1300, from Old French jalos keen, zealous; avaricious; jealous (12c., Modern French
jaloux), from Late Latin zelosus, from zelus zeal, from Greek zelos, sometimes jealousy, but more
often in a good sense (emulation, rivalry, zeal). See zeal. In biblical language (early 13c.)
tolerating no unfaithfulness.    Most of the words for 'envy' ... had from the outset a hostile
force, based on 'look at' (with malice), 'not love,' etc. Conversely, most of those which became
distinctive terms for 'jealousy' were originally used also in a good sense, 'zeal, emulation.'
[Buck, pp.1138-9]    Among the ways to express this in other tongues are Swedish svartsjuka,
literally black-sick, from phrase bara svarta strumpor wear black stockings, also be jealous. Danish
skinsyg jealous, literally skin-sick, is from skind hide, skin said to be explained by Swedish
dialectal expression fa skinn receive a refusal in courtship.


orthopraxy (n.)

1840, from ortho- + Greek praxis a doing, action, performance (see praxis).   Errata -- Page 263,
line 9 from bottom, for 'orthodoxy' read orthopraxy. This is a new coin from the mint of Dr.
[Andrew] Wylie [of Bloomington College, Indiana], at least I have not before noticed it. Its
etymology places it in a just contrast with orthodoxy: for if that consecrated word indicates
thinking right, orthopraxy will legitimately import doing right, and hence, as Mr. Wylie says,
orthopraxy in the last dread day will pass the divine ordeal incomparably better than orthodoxy. O!
that a zeal for orthopraxy would transcend the zeal for orthodoxy! [The Millennial Harbinger, vol.
IV, no. VIII, Bethany, Va., August 1840]


jealousy (n.)

c.1200, of God; c.1300, of persons, from Old French jalousie enthusiasm, love, longing, jealousy
(12c.), from jalos (see jealous). Meaning zeal, fervor, devotion is late 14c.


lukewarm (adj.)

late 14c., from luke + warm (adj.). Figurative sense of lacking in zeal (of persons or their
actions) is from 1520s. Related: Lukewarmly; lukewarmness.


avidity (n.)

mid-15c., eagerness, zeal, from Old French avidite avidity, greed, from Latin aviditatem (nominative
aviditas) eagerness, avidity, noun of quality from avidus (see avid).


ardor (n.)

early 15c., heat of passion or desire, from Old French ardure heat, glow; passion (12c.), from Latin
ardorem (nominative ardor) a flame, fire, burning, heat; also of feelings, etc., eagerness, zeal,
from ardere to burn (see ardent). In Middle English, used of base passions; since Milton's time, of
noble ones.


Mohammed

former common English transliteration of Muhammad.    The worst of letting the learned gentry bully
us out of our traditional Mahometan &amp; Mahomet ... is this: no sooner have we tried to be good
&amp; learnt to say, or at least write, Mohammed than they are fired with zeal to get us a step or
two further on the path of truth, which at present seems likely to end in Muhammad with a dot under
the h .... [H.W. Fowler, A Dictionary of Modern English Usage, 1926]


studious (adj.)

mid-14c. (implied in studiously) zealous, diligent, eager, from Latin studiosus devoted to study,
assiduous, zealous, from studium eagerness, zeal (see study). From late 14c. as eager to learn,
devoted to learning, also, as noun, those who study or read diligently. Related: Studiousness.


industry (n.)

late 15c., cleverness, skill, from Old French industrie activity; aptitude (14c.) or directly from
Latin industria diligence, activity, zeal, fem. of industrius industrious, diligent, used as a noun,
from early Latin indostruus diligent, from indu in, within + stem of struere to build (see structure
(n.)). Sense of diligence, effort is from 1530s; meaning trade or manufacture first recorded 1560s;
that of systematic work is 1610s.


laches (n.)

negligence in performance of legal dute, 1570s, earlier simply slackness, negligence, want of zeal
(late 14c.), from Anglo-French laches, Old French lachesse, from Old French lasche (Modern French
l&acirc;che), verbal adjective from lascher, from Vulgar Latin *lascare, classical laxare, from
laxus (see loose). Compare riches.


enthusiasm (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French enthousiasme (16c.) and directly from Late Latin enthusiasmus, from Greek
enthousiasmos divine inspiration, from enthousiazein be inspired or possessed by a god, be rapt, be
in ecstasy, from entheos divinely inspired, possessed by a god, from en in (see en- (2)) + theos god
(see theo-). Acquired a derogatory sense of excessive religious emotion (1650s) under the Puritans;
generalized sense of fervor, zeal (the main modern sense) is first recorded 1716.


courage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corage (12c., Modern French courage) heart, innermost feelings; temper, from
Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin cor heart (see
heart) which remains a common metaphor for inner strength.    In Middle English, used broadly for
what is in one's mind or thoughts, hence bravery, but also wrath, pride, confidence, lustiness, or
any sort of inclination. Replaced Old English ellen, which also meant zeal, strength.


edifice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French edifice building, from Latin aedificium building, from aedificare to
erect a building, from aedis, variant of aedes temple, sanctuary, usually a single edifice without
partitions, also, in the plural, dwelling house, building, originally a place with a hearth + the
root of facere to make (see factitious).   &AElig;dis is from PIE *aidh- to burn (cognates: Greek
aithein to burn, Sanskrit inddhe burst into flames, Old Irish aed fire, Welsh aidd heat, zeal, Old
High German eit funeral pile), from root *ai- to burn.


study (v.)

early 12c., to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate (translating Latin occupatur), from Old
French estudiier to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine (13c., Modern French
&eacute;tudier), from Medieval Latin studiare, from Latin studium study, application, originally
eagerness, from studere to be diligent (to be pressing forward), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push,
stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Martha swanc and becarcade to gefor&eth;igene &thorn;an
H&aelig;lende and his &thorn;eowen &thorn;a lichamlice behef&eth;en. Seo studdede emb &thorn;a
uterlice &thorn;ing. [Homily for the Feast of the Virgin Mary, c.1125]    From c.1300 as apply
oneself to the acquisition of learning, pursue a formal course of study, also read a book or
writings intently or meditatively. From mid-14c. as reflect, muse, think, ponder. Meaning regard
attentively is from 1660s. Related: Studied; studying.


ban (v.)

Old English bannan to summon, command, proclaim, from Proto-Germanic *bannan proclaim, command,
forbid (cognates: Old High German bannan to command or forbid under threat of punishment, German
bannen banish, expel, curse), originally to speak publicly, from PIE root *bha- (2) to speak
(cognates: Old Irish bann law, Armenian ban word; see fame (n.)).     Main modern sense of to
prohibit (late 14c.) is from Old Norse cognate banna to curse, prohibit, and probably in part from
Old French ban, which meant outlawry, banishment, among other things (see banal) and was a borrowing
from Germanic. The sense evolution in Germanic was from speak to proclaim a threat to (in Norse,
German, etc.) curse.    The Germanic root, borrowed in Latin and French, has been productive:
banish, bandit, contraband, etc. Related: Banned; banning. Banned in Boston dates from 1920s, in
allusion to the excessive zeal and power of that city's Watch and Ward Society.


