zoology (n.)

science of animals, 1660s, from Modern Latin zoologia, from Greek zoion animal (see zoo-) + -logia
study (see -logy).


-idae

word-forming element used to form family names in zoology, Latin plural noun suffix, plural of -ides
(see -id).


zoological (adj.)

1807, from zoology + -ical.


theco-

before vowels thec-, word-forming element used in botany and zoology with the sense case, capsule,
from Latinized combining form of Greek theke case, receptacle, from root of tithenai to put, place
(see theme).


zoologist (n.)

1660s, from zoology + -ist.


sea-horse (n.)

late 15c., walrus, from sea + horse (n.); also see walrus. Also in heraldry as a fabulous animal
withy the foreparts of a horse and the tail of a fish. Main modern sense in zoology is attested from
1580s.


manubrium (n.)

handle-like process, 1848 in anatomy and zoology, from Latin manubrium handle, hilt, properly that
which is held in the hand, from manus hand (see manual (adj.)).


ethology (n.)

late 17c., mimicry, from Latin ethologia, from Greek ethologia, from ethos character (see ethos). As
a branch of zoology, from 1897.


chelate (adj.)

having pincer-like claws, 1826 as a term in zoology; 1920 in chemistry, from Modern Latin chela claw
(from Greek khele claw, talon, cloven hoof; see chelicerae) + -ate (2). Related: Chelated;
chelating; chelation.


valve (n.)

late 14c., one of the halves of a folding door, from Latin valva (plural valvae) section of a
folding or revolving door, literally that which turns, related to volvere to roll (see volvox).
Sense extended 1610s to membranous fold regulating flow of bodily fluids; 1650s to mechanical device
that works like an anatomical valve; and 1660s in zoology to halves of a hinged shell. Related:
Valved.


Carolina

1663, North American colony named for King Charles II (the Latin form of the male proper name is
Carolus). Earlier French colonists called the region Caroline (1564) in honor of Charles IX, King of
France. A 1629 grant here by Charles I of England was named Carolana. The original site of the name
is modern South Carolina and the tract originally included North Carolina and Georgia; North
Carolina first used 1691, in reference to settlements made from Virginia. The official division into
north and south dates from 1710. Used generically in forming species names in botany and zoology
from 1734.


-acea

word-forming element denoting orders and classes in zoology, from Latin -acea, neuter plural of
-aceus belonging to, of the nature of (enlarged from adjectival suffix -ax, genitive -acis); neuter
plural because of a presumed animalia, a neuter plural noun. Thus, crustacea shellfish are
*crustacea animalia crusty animals. In botany, the suffix is -aceae, from the fem. plural of -aceus,
with reference to Latin plantae, which is a fem. plural.


salamander (n.)

mid-14c., legendary lizard-like creature that can live in fire, from Old French salamandre legendary
fiery beast, also cricket (12c.), from Latin salamandra, from Greek salamandra, probably of eastern
origin.     The application in zoology to a tailed amphibian (known natively as an eft or newt) is
first recorded 1610s. Aristotle, and especially Pliny, are responsible for the fiction of an animal
that thrives in and extinguishes fires. The eft lives in damp logs and secretes a milky substance
when threatened, but there is no obvious natural explanation its connection with the myth.    Also
used 18c. for a woman who lives chastely in the midst of temptations (after Addison), and a soldier
who exposes himself to fire in battle. To rub someone a salamander was a 19c. form of German student
drinking toast (einem einen salamander reiben). Related: Salamandrine; salamandroid.


