Q

16th letter of the classical Roman alphabet, from the Phoenician equivalent of Hebrew koph, qoph,
which was used for the more guttural of the two k sounds in Semitic.    The letter existed in Greek,
but was little used and not alphabetized; the stereotypical connection with -u- began in Latin.
Anglo-Saxon scribes adopted the habit at first, but later used spellings with cw- or cu-. The qu-
pattern returned to English with the Norman Conquest and had displaced cw- by c.1300. In some
spelling variants of late Middle English, quh- also took work from wh-, especially in Scottish and
northern dialects, for example Gavin Douglas, Provost of St. Giles, in his vernacular Aeneid of
1513:    Lyk as the rois in June with hir sueit smell  The marygulde or dasy doith excell.  Quhy
suld I than, with dull forhede and vane,  With ruide engine and barrand emptive brane,  With bad
harsk speche and lewit barbour tong,  Presume to write quhar thi sueit bell is rong,  Or contirfait
sa precious wourdis deir?    Scholars use -q- alone to transliterate Semitic koph (as in Quran,
Qatar, Iraq ). In Christian theology, Q has been used since 1901 to signify the hypothetical source
of passages shared by Matthew and Luke, but not in Mark; in this sense probably it is an
abbreviation of German Quelle source.


Q and A

also Q &amp; A, 1954, abbreviation of question and answer (itself attested by 1817).


Q.E.D.

1760, abbreviation of Latin quod erat demonstrandum which was to be demonstrated.


q.t. (n.)

slang for quiet, in phrase on the q.t., attested from 1874. Phrase on the quiet appears from 1847.


Qatar

probably from Arabic katran tar, resin, in reference to petroleum. Related: Qatari.


qi (n.)

physical life force, 1850, from Chinese qi air, breath.


qu-

see Q.


qua

as, in the capacity of, from Latin qua where? on which side? at which place? which way? in what
direction? figuratively how? in what manner? by what method?; to what extent? in what degree?
correlative pronomial adverb of place, from PIE *kwo-, stem of relative and interrogative pronouns
(source also of Old English hwa who; see who).


Quaalude (n.)

1965, proprietary name (trademark by Wm. H. Rohrer Inc., Ft. Washington, Pennsylvania, U.S.A.) of
methaqualone.


quack (v.)

to make a duck sound, 1610s, earlier quake (1520s), variant of quelke (early 14c.), of echoic origin
(compare Middle Dutch quacken, Old Church Slavonic kvakati, Latin coaxare to croak, Greek koax the
croaking of frogs, Hittite akuwakuwash frog). Middle English on the quakke (14c.) meant hoarse,
croaking. Related: Quacked; quacking.


quack (n.1)

medical charlatan, 1630s, short for quacksalver (1570s), from obsolete Dutch quacksalver (modern
kwakzalver), literally hawker of salve, from Middle Dutch quacken to brag, boast, literally to croak
(see quack (v.)) + salf salve, salven to rub with ointment (see salve (v.)). As an adjective from
1650s. The oldest attested form of the word in this sense in English is as a verb, to play the quack
(1620s). The Dutch word also is the source of German Quacksalber, Danish kvaksalver, Swedish
kvacksalvare.


quack (n.2)

duck sound, 1839, from quack (v.).


quacker (n.)

a duck, 1846, agent noun from quack (v.).


quackery (n.)

1690s, from quack (n.) + -ery.


quacksalver (n.)

1570s; see quack (n.1).


quad

1820 as a shortening of quadrangle (n.) in the building sense (in this case quadrangle of a college,
Oxford student slang); 1880 as short for quadrat (n.); 1896 as quadruplet (n.), originally bicycle
for four riders; later one of four young at a single birth (1951, of armadillos); 1970 as
quadraphonic (adj.). Related: Quads.


Quadragesima (n.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin quadragesima (dies) the fortieth (day), altered diminutive of Latin
quadrigesimus fortieth, from quadriginta forty, related to quattuor four (see four). Related:
Quadragesimal.


quadrangle (n.)

late 14c., from Old French quadrangle (13c.) and directly from Late Latin quadrangulum four-sided
figure, noun use of neuter of Latin adjective quadrangulus having four quarters, from Latin quattuor
four (see four) + angulus angle (see angle (n.)). Meaning four-sided court between buildings is from
1590s.


quadrangular (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin quadrangularis having four corners, from Late Latin quadrangulus
(see quadrangle).


quadrant (n.)

late 14c., a quarter of a day, six hours, from Middle French quadrant, from Latin quadrantem
(nominative quadrans) fourth part, also the name of a coin worth a quarter of an as, noun use of
present participle of quadrare to make square; put in order, arrange, complete; run parallel, be
exact, figuratively to fit, suit, be proper, related to quadrus a square, quattuor four (see four).
The surveying instrument is first so called c.1400, because it forms a quarter circle. Related:
Quadrantal.


quadraphonic (adj.)

1969, irregular formation from quadri- four + phonic, from Greek phone sound, voice (see fame (n.)).
The goal was to reproduce front-to-back sound distribution in addition to side-to-side stereo. The
later term for the same idea, surround sound, is preferable to this.


quadrat (n.)

a blank, low-cast type used by typographers to fill in larger spaces in printed lines, 1680s, from
French quadrat a quadrat, literally a square, from Latin quadratrus, past participle of quadrare to
square, make square (see quadrant). Earlier in English it meant a type of surveying instrument
(c.1400).


quadratic (adj.)

1650s, square, with -ic + obsolete quadrate a square; a group of four things (late 14c.), from Latin
quadratum, noun use of neuter adjective quadratus square, squared, past participle of quadrare to
square, set in order, complete (see quadrant). Quadratic equations (1660s) so called because they
involve the square of x.


quadratus (n.)

square-shaped muscle, 1727, from Latin quadratus square, squared (see quadratic).


quadrennial (adj.)

1650s, lasting four years; as happening once every four years, 1701; from quadri- + ending from
biennial, etc. Correct formation would be quadriennial (compare Latin quadriennium period of four
years). As a noun from 1640s. Related: Quadrennially.


quadri-

before vowels quad- (before -p- often quadru-, from an older form in Latin), word-forming element
meaning four, four times, having four, consisting of four, from Latin quadri-, related to quattor
four (see four).


quadricentennial (n.)

also quadri-centennial, 1859, from quadri- + centennial.


quadricep (n.)

large extensor muscle of the leg, 1840, from quadri- on model of bicep. Related: Quadriceps. So
called because divided into four parts.


quadriceps (n.)

1840, see quadricep.


quadrifid (adj.)

divided in four parts, 1660s, from quadri- + -fid.


quadrilateral (n.)

four-sided, 1640s, with -al (1) + Latin quadrilaterus, from quadri- four (see quadri-) + latus
(genitive lateris) side (see oblate (n.)). As an adjective from 1650s. Related: Quadrilaterally.


quadriliteral (adj.)

consisting of four letters, 1771, from quadri- + literal.


quadrille (n.)

1773, lively square dance for four couples, from French quadrille (17c.), originally one of four
groups of horsemen in a tournament (a sense attested in English from 1738), from Spanish cuadrilla,
diminutive of cuadro four-sided battle square, from Latin quadrum a square, related to quattuor four
(see four). The craze for the dance hit England in 1816, and it underwent a vigorous revival late
19c. among the middle classes.    Earlier the name of a popular card game for four hands, and in
this sense from French quadrille (1725), from Spanish cuartillo, from cuarto fourth, from Latin
quartus. OED notes it as fashionable from 1726 (and was in turn superseded by whist), the year of
Swift's (or Congreve's) satirical ballad on the craze:    The commoner, and knight, the peer,  Men
of all ranks and fame,  Leave to their wives the only care,  To propagate their name;  And well that
duty they fulfil  When the good husband's at Quadrille &amp;c.;


quadrillion (n.)

1670s, from French quadrillion (16c.) from quadri- four (see quadri-) + (m)illion. Compare billion.
In Great Britain, the fourth power of a million (1 followed by 24 zeroes); in the U.S., the fifth
power of a thousand (1 followed by 15 zeroes).


quadripartite (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin quadripartitus, from quadri- four (see quadri-) + partitus, past participle
of partiri to divide (see part (v.)).


quadriplegia (n.)

1895, a medical hybrid coined from Latin-based quadri- four + -plegia, as in paraplegia, ultimately
from Greek plege stroke, from root of plessein to strike (see plague (n.)). A correct, all-Greek
formation would be *tessaraplegia.


quadriplegic (adj.)

also quadraplegic, 1897, from quadriplegia + -ic. A correct, all-Greek formation would be
*tessaraplegic. The noun is first attested 1912, from the adjective.


quadrivium (n.)

arithmetic, music, geometry, astronomy, 1804 (see liberal arts), from Latin quadrivium, which meant
place where four roads meet, crossroads, from quadri- four (see quadri-) + via way, road, channel,
course (see via). The adjective quadrivial is attested from late 15c. in English with the sense
having four roads.


quadroon (n.)

1707, offspring of a white and a mulatto, from Spanish cuarteron (used chiefly of the offspring of a
European and a mestizo), literally one who has a fourth (Negro blood), from cuarto fourth, from
Latin quartus (see quart), so called because he or she has one quarter African blood. Altered by
influence of words in quadr-. There also was some use in 19c. of quintroon (from Spanish quinteron)
one who is fifth in descent from a Negro; one who has one-sixteenth Negro blood.


quadru-

word-forming element meaning four, having four, consisting of four, variant of quadri-, especially
before -p-, from an older form of the element, which perhaps was influenced later by tri-.


quadruped (n.)

1640s, from French quadrup&egrave;de (16c.), from Latin quadrupes (genitive quadrupedis) four-
footed, on all fours, also, as a noun, a four-footed animal, from quadri- four (see quadri-) + pes
foot (see foot (n.)). The adjective is attested from 1741. Related: Quadrupedal (1610s).


quadruple (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French quadrupler, from Late Latin quadruplare make fourfold, multiply by
four, from Latin quadruplus (adj.) quadruple, fourfold (see quadruple (adj.)).


quadruple (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French quadruple (13c.), from Latin quadruplus fourfold, from quadri- four (see
quadru-) + -plus -fold (see -plus).


quadruplet (n.)

one of four children at a single birth, 1787; from quadruple (adj.) with ending from triplet.
Related: Quadruplets. Musical sense is from 1873.


quadruplex (adj.)

1875, in reference to telegraph systems in which four messages can be wired simultaneously, from
quadru- + plex. In classical Latin, quadruplex meant fourfold, quadruple, as a noun, a fourfold
amount.


quadruplicate (adj.)

1650s, from Latin quadruplicatus, past participle of quadruplicare make fourfold, from quadri- four
(see quadri-) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)).


quadruplicate (v.)

1660s, from Latin quadruplicatus, past participle of quadruplicare make fourfold, from quadri- four
(see quadri-) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)). Related: Quadruplicated; quadruplicating.


quadruplication (n.)

1570s, from Latin quadruplicationem (nominative quadruplicatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of quadruplicare (see quadruplicate (v.)).


quaere

Latin imperative of quaerere to ask, inquire (see query (v.)). Hence one may ask (1530s) as an
introduction to a question.


quaff (v.)

1510s (implied in quaffer), perhaps imitative, or perhaps from Low German quassen to overindulge (in
food and drink), with -ss- misread as -ff-. Related: Quaffed; quaffing. The noun is attested by
1570s, from the verb.


quag (n.)

marshy spot, 1580s, a variant of Middle English quabbe a marsh, bog, from Old English *cwabba shake,
tremble (like something soft and flabby).


quagga (n.)

zebra-like South African animal, 1785, from Afrikaans (1710), from the name for the beast in a
native language, perhaps Hottentot quacha, probably of imitative origin. In modern Xhosa, the form
is iqwara, with a clicking -q-. What was likely the last one died in an Amsterdam zoo in 1883.


quagmire (n.)

1570s, bog, marsh, from obsolete quag bog, marsh + mire (n.). Early spellings include quamyre
(1550s), quabmire (1590s), quadmire (c.1600). Extended sense of difficult situation, inescapable bad
position is recorded by 1766; but this seems to have been not in common use in much of 19c. (absent
in Century Dictionary, 1902), but revived in a narrower sense in reference to military invasions in
American English, 1965, with reference to Vietnam (popularized in the book title The Making of a
Quagmire by David Halberstam).


quahog (n.)

1753 (quogue; Roger Williams had it as poquauhock, 1643), from an Algonquian language, perhaps
Narragansett poquauhock or Pequot p'quaghhaug hard clam.


quai (n.)

1870, public path beside a waterway, from French quai (12c., see quay). Often short for Quai
d'Orsay, the street on the south bank of the Seine in Paris, since mid-19c. site of the French
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and hence sometimes used metonymically for it (1922).


quail (n.)

migratory game bird, late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname (Quayle), from Old French quaille (Modern
French caille), perhaps via Medieval Latin quaccula (source also of Proven&ccedil;al calha, Italian
quaglia, Old Spanish coalla), or directly from a Germanic source (compare Dutch kwakkel, Old High
German quahtala quail, German Wachtel, Old English wihtel), imitative of the bird's cry. Or the
English word might be directly from Proto-Germanic. Slang meaning young attractive woman first
recorded 1859.


quail (v.)

c.1400, have a morbid craving; early 15c., grow feeble or sick; mid-15c., to fade, fail, give way,
of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Dutch quelen to suffer, be ill, from Proto-Germanic *kwaljan,
from PIE *gwele- (1) to throw, to pierce (see quell). Or from obsolete quail to curdle (late 14c.),
from Old French coailler, from Latin coagulare (see coagulate). Sense of lose heart, shrink, cower
is attested from 1550s. According to OED, common 1520-1650, then rare until 19c., when apparently it
was revived by Scott. Related: Quailed; quailing.


quaint (adj.)

c.1200, cointe, cunning, ingenious; proud, from Old French cointe knowledgeable, well-informed;
clever; arrogant, proud; elegant, gracious, from Latin cognitus known, approved, past participle of
cognoscere get or come to know well (see cognizance). Modern spelling is from early 14c.    Later in
English, elaborate, skillfully made (c.1300); strange and clever (mid-14c.). Sense of old-fashioned
but charming is first attested 1795, and could describe the word itself, which had become rare after
c.1700 (though it soon recovered popularity in this secondary sense).  Related: Quaintly;
quaintness.


quake (v.)

Old English cwacian quake, tremble, chatter (of teeth), related to cweccan to shake, swing, move,
vibrate, of unknown origin with no certain cognates outside English. Perhaps somehow imitative. In
reference to earth tremors, probably by c.1200. Related: Quaked; quaking.


quake (n.)

early 14c., a trembling in fear, from quake (v.). Rare except in combinations. Now usually as a
shortening of earthquake, in which use it is attested from 1640s. Old English had the verbal noun
cwacung shaking, trembling.


Quaker (n.)

1651, said to have been applied to them in 1650 by Justice Bennett at Derby, from George Fox's
admonition to his followers to tremble at the Word of the Lord; but the word was used earlier of
foreign sects given to fits of shaking during religious fervor, and that is likely the source here.
Either way, it never was an official name of the Religious Society of Friends. The word in a literal
sense is attested from early 15c., an agent noun from quake (v.).    There is not a word in the
Scripture, to put David's condition into rime and meeter: sometimes he quaked and trembled, and lay
roaring all the day long, that he watered his bed with his tears: and how can you sing these
conditions (but dishonour the Lord) and say all your bones quake, your flesh trembled, and that you
water your bed with your tears? when you live in pride and haughtiness, and pleasure, and
wantonness; etc. [A Brief Discovery of a threefold estate of Antichrist Now Extant in the world,
etc., an early Quaker work, London, 1653]    Quaker gun (1809, American English) was a log painted
black and propped up to look from a distance like a cannon, so called for the sect's noted pacifism.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has been known as the Quaker City since at least 1824. Related:
Quakerish; Quakeress (a female Quaker); Quakerism.


quale (n.)

death, destruction, Old English cwalu, cognate with Old Norse kval torment, torture, from a variant
of the root of quell.


qualification (n.)

1540s, restriction, modification, from Middle French qualification and directly from Medieval Latin
qualificationem (nominative qualificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of qualificare
(see qualify). Meaning accomplishment that qualifies someone to do something is from 1660s; that of
necessary precondition is from 1723. Related: Qualifications.


qualifier (n.)

1560s, agent noun from qualify. Grammatical sense is from 1580s.


qualify (v.)

mid-15c., to invest with a quality, from Middle French qualifier (15c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin qualificare attribute a quality to; make of a certain quality, from Latin qualis of what
sort?, correlative pronomial adjective (see quality) + facere to make (see factitious). Meaning to
limit, modify is from 1530s. Sense of be fit for a job first appeared 1580s. Related: Qualified;
qualifying.


qualitative (adj.)

early 15c., that produces a (physical) quality, from Medieval Latin qualitativus relating to
quality, from stem of Latin qualitas a quality, property, nature (see quality). Meaning concerned
with quality is from c.1600 in English, from French qualitatif or Medieval Latin qualitativus.
Related: Qualitatively.


quality (n.)

c.1300, temperament, character, disposition, from Old French qualite quality, nature, characteristic
(12c., Modern French qualit&eacute;), from Latin qualitatem (nominative qualitas) a quality,
property; nature, state, condition (said [Tucker, etc.] to have been coined by Cicero to translate
Greek poiotes), from qualis what kind of a, from PIE pronomial base *kwo- (see who).    Meaning
degree of goodness is late 14c. Meaning social rank, position is c.1400. Noun phrase quality time
first recorded 1977. Quality of life is from 1943. Quality control first attested 1935.


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


qualms (n.)

see qualm.


quandary (n.)

state of perplexity, 1570s, of unknown origin, perhaps a quasi-Latinism based on Latin quando when?
at what time?; at the time that, inasmuch, pronomial adverb of time, related to qui who (see who).
Originally accented on the second syllable.


quango (n.)

1973, acronym for quasi-non-governmental organization (a descriptive phrase itself attested from
1967). Related: Quangocracy; quangocrat.


quantifiable (adj.)

1868, from quantify + -able. Related: Quantifiably.


quantification (n.)

1850, noun of action from quantify.


quantify (v.)

1840, from Medieval Latin quantificare, from Latin quantus as much, correlative pronomial adjective
(see quantity) + facere to make (see factitious). Literal sense of determine the quantity of,
measure is from 1878. Related: Quantified; quantifying.


quantitation (n.)

1952, from quantity + -ation. Related: Quantitate.


quantitative (adj.)

1580s, having quantity, from Medieval Latin quantitativus, from stem of Latin quantitas (see
quantity). Meaning measurable is from 1650s. Related: Quantitatively.


quantitive (adj.)

1650s, from quantity + -ive. Related: Quantitively.


quantity (n.)

early 14c., from Old French quantite, cantite (12c., Modern French quantit&eacute;) and directly
from Latin quantitatem (nominative quantitas) relative greatness or extent, coined as a loan-
translation of Greek posotes (from posos how great? how much?) from Latin quantus of what size? how
much? how great? what amount?, correlative pronomial adjective, related to qui who (see who).
Latin quantitatem also is the source of Italian quantita, Spanish cantidad, Danish and Swedish
kvantitet, German quantitat.


quantum (n.)

1610s, one's share or portion, from Latin quantum (plural quanta) as much as, so much as; how much?
how far? how great an extent? neuter singular of correlative pronomial adjective quantus as much
(see quantity). Introduced in physics directly from Latin by Max Planck, 1900; reinforced by
Einstein, 1905. Quantum theory is from 1912; quantum mechanics, 1922; quantum jump is first recorded
1954; quantum leap, 1963, often figurative.


quarantine (n.)

1520s, period of 40 days in which a widow has the right to remain in her dead husband's house.
Earlier quarentyne (15c.), desert in which Christ fasted for 40 days, from Latin quadraginta forty,
related to quattuor four (see four).    Sense of period a ship suspected of carrying disease is kept
in isolation is 1660s, from Italian quarantina giorni, literally space of forty days, from quaranta
forty, from Latin quadraginta. So called from the Venetian custom of keeping ships from plague-
stricken countries waiting off its port for 40 days (first enforced 1377) to assure that no latent
cases were aboard. The extended sense of any period of forced isolation is from 1670s.


quarantine (v.)

1804, from quarantine (n.). Related: Quarantined; quarantining.


quark (n.)

1964, applied by U.S. physicist Murray Gell-Mann (b.1929), who said in correspondence with the
editors of the OED in 1978 that he took it from a word in James Joyce's Finnegans Wake (1939), but
also that the sound of the word was in his head before he encountered the printed form in Joyce.
German Quark curds, rubbish has been proposed as the ultimate inspiration [Barnhart; Gell-Mann's
parents were immigrants from Austria-Hungary]. George Zweig, Gell-Mann's co-proposer of the theory,
is said to have preferred the name ace for them.


quarrel (n.1)

angry dispute, mid-14c., originally ground for complaint, from Old French querele matter, concern,
business; dispute, controversy (Modern French querelle), from Latin querella complaint, accusation;
lamentation, from queri to complain, lament. Replaced Old English sacan. Sense of contention between
persons is from 1570s.


quarrel (n.2)

square-headed bolt for a crossbow, mid-13c., from Old French quarel, carrel bolt, arrow, from Vulgar
Latin *quadrellus, diminutive of Late Latin quadrus (adj.) square, related to quattuor four (see
four). Now-archaic sense of square or diamond-shaped plane of glass first recorded mid-15c.


quarrel (v.)

late 14c., to raise an objection; 1520s as to contend violently, to fall out, from quarrel (n.1) and
in part from Old French quereler (Modern French quereller). Related: Quarrelled; quarrelling.


quarrelsome (adj.)

1590s, from quarrel (n.1) + -some (1). Related: Quarrelsomeness.


quarry (n.1)

what is hunted, early 14c., quirre entrails of deer placed on the hide and given to dogs of the
chase as a reward, from Anglo-French quirreie, Old French cuiriee the spoil, quarry (Modern French
cur&#233;e), altered (by influence of Old French cuir skin, from Latin corium hide), from Old French
cor&eacute;e viscera, entrails, from Vulgar Latin *corata entrails, from Latin cor heart (see
heart). Sense of anything chased in hunt is first recorded 1610s; earlier bird targeted by a hawk or
other raptor (late 15c.).


quarry (n.2)

open place where rocks are excavated, c.1400 (mid-13c. as a place name), from Medieval Latin
quareia, dissimilated from quarreria (mid-13c.), literally place where stones are squared, from
Latin quadrare to square (see quadrant).


quarry (v.)

1774, from quarry (n.2). Related: Quarried; quarrying.


quarryman (n.)

1610s, from quarry (n.2) + man (n.). Related: Quarrymen.


quart (n.)

one-fourth of a gallon, early 14c., from Old French quarte a fourth part (13c.), from Latin quarta
(pars), from fem. of quartus the fourth, related to quattuor four, from PIE root *kewtwor- (see
four). Compare Latin quartarius fourth part, also the name of a small liquid measure (the fourth
part of a sextarius), which was about the same as an English pint.


quarter (n.)

c.1300, one-fourth of anything; one of four parts or divisions of a thing; often in reference to the
four parts into which a slaughtered animal is cut, from Old French quartier, cartier (12c.), from
Latin quartarius fourth part, from quartus fourth (see quart). One of the earliest dated references
in English is to parts of the body as dismembered during execution (c.1300).    Used of the phases
of the moon from early 15c. The use of quarter of an hour is attested from mid-15c. In Middle
English quarter also meant one of the four divisions of a 12-hour night (late 14c.), and the quarter
of the night meant nine o'clock p.m. (early 14c.).    From late 14c. as one of the four quadrants of
the heavens; hence, from the notion of the winds, a side, a direction (c.1400). In heraldry from
mid-14c. as one of the four divisions of a shield or coat of arms. The word's connection with four
loosened in Middle English and by 15c. expressions such as six-quartered for six-sided are found.
Meaning region, locality, area, place is from c.1400. Meaning portion of a town (identified by the
class or race of people who live there) is first attested 1520s. For military sense, see quarters.
As a period of time in a football game, from 1911. Quarter horse, bred strong for racing on quarter-
mile tracks, first recorded 1834.    The coin (one fourth of a dollar) is peculiar to U.S., first
recorded 1783. But quarter could mean a farthing in Middle English (late 14c.), and compare British
quadrant a farthing (c.1600), and classical Latin quadrans, the name of a coin worth a quarter of an
as (the basic unit of Roman currency).   Quarter days (mid-15c.), designated as days when rents were
paid and contracts and leases began or expired, were, in England, Lady day (March 25), Midsummer day
(June 24), Michaelmas day (Sept. 29), and Christmas day (Dec. 25); in Scotland, keeping closer to
the pagan Celtic calendar, they were Candlemas (Feb. 2), Whitsunday (May 15), Lammas (Aug. 1), and
Martinmas (Nov. 11). Quarter in the sense period of three months; one of the four divisions of a
year is recorded from late 14c.


quarter (v.)

to cut in quarters, divide into four parts, mid-14c., from quarter (n.). Specifically as the word
for a form of criminal punishment from late 14c. (Old English had slitcwealm death by rending).
Related: Quartered; quartering. The meaning to put up soldiers is recorded from 1590s (see
quarters).


quarterback (n.)

in U.S. football, 1876, from quarter (n.) + back (n.); so called from his position on the field at
the start of play, between the halfback and the center. As a verb from 1945. Figurative sense from
1952. Monday morning quarterback is 1932 (n.), 1972 (v.); originally pro football player slang for
sportswriters (U.S. professional football games typically are played on Sundays).


quarterly (adv.)

early 15c., from quarter (n.) + -ly (2). As an adjective from 1560s, from -ly (1). As a noun, from
1830, a quarterly publication, from the adjective.


quartermaster (n.)

early 15c., subordinate officer of a ship, from French quartier-ma&icirc;tre or directly from Dutch
kwartier-meester; originally a ship's officer whose duties included stowing of the hold; later
(c.1600) an officer in charge of quarters and rations for troops. See quarters.


quarters (n.)

military dwelling place, 1590s, from quarter (n.) in sense of portion of a town. As part of an
American plantation where the slaves live, from 1724. The military sense seems to be also the source
of quartermaster and it might be behind the phrase give quarter spare from immediate death (1610s,
often in the negative), on the notion of provide a prisoner with shelter.


quarterstaff (n.)

also quarter-staff, 1540s (quarter-stroke stroke with a quarterstaff is attested from early 15c.),
stout pole, six to eight feet long (six-and-a-half sometimes is given as the standard length),
tipped with iron, formerly a weapon used by the English peasantry. From staff (n.). The quarter
likely is in reference to its operation.    It was grasped by one hand in the middle, and by the
other between the middle and the end. In the attack the latter hand shifted from one quarter of the
staff to the other, giving the weapon a rapid circular motion, which brought the ends on the
adversary at unexpected points. [Century Dictionary]


quartet (n.)

1773, musical composition for four instruments or voices, from French quartette, from Italian
quartetto, diminutive of quarto fourth, from Latin quartus fourth (see quart). Meaning set of four
singers or musical performers is from 1814.


quartile (n.)

c.1500, originally in astronomy; see quartile (adj.). In statistics, from 1879.


quartile (adj.)

mid-15c., 90 degrees apart (of astronomical measurements), from Middle French quartil, from Medieval
Latin quartilus of a quartile, from Latin quartus fourth (see quart).


quarto (n.)

book from paper folded to make four pages to the sheet, late 15c., from Medieval Latin in quarto in
the fourth (part of a sheet of paper), from quarto, ablative singular of Latin quartus fourth (see
quart).


quartz (n.)

silicon dioxide, 1756, from German Quarz, Zwarc rock crystal, from Middle High German twarc,
probably from a West Slavic source, compare Czech tvrdy, Polish twardy quartz, noun uses of an
adjective meaning hard, from Old Church Slavonic tvrudu hard, from Proto-Slavic *tvrd-, from PIE
*(s)twer- to grasp, hold; hard.


quartzite (n.)

1837, from quartz + -ite.


quasar (n.)

1964, from quas(i-stell)ar radio source (1963); from quasi- + stellar.


quash (v.)

to make void, annul, early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser to annul, declare void, and
directly from Medieval Latin quassare, alteration of Late Latin cassare, from cassus null, void,
empty (see caste (n.)).    Meaning to break, crush, is early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser
to break, smash, injure, harm, weaken, from Latin quassare to shatter, frequentative of quatere
(past participle quassus) to shake, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (cognates: Greek passein to
sprinkle, Lithuanian kuteti to shake up, Old Saxon skuddian to move violently, German sch&#252;tteln
to shake, Old English scudan to hasten).    The words have influenced each other in form and sense
since Medieval Latin and now are somewhat grown together. Related: Quashed; quashing.


quasi (adv.)

late 15c., Latin, in hypothetical comparisons, as if, just as if, as though; in real comparisons
just as, as; in approximation, somewhat like, nearly, not far from; from quam as relative pronomial
adverb of manner (see who) + si if, from PIE pronomial stem *swo- so (see so).


quasi-

word-forming element used since 18c. (but most productively in 20c.) and typically meaning kind of,
resembling, like but not really, as if; from Latin quasi as if, as it were (see quasi).


quasimodo (n.)

Low Sunday, 1706, Quasimodo Sunday, from Latin quasi modo, first words of introit for the first
Sunday after Easter: quasi modo geniti infantes as newborn babes (1 Pet. ii:2). The hunchback in
Victor Hugo's novel was supposed to have been abandoned as an infant at Notre Dame on this day,
hence his name. For first element, see quasi; for second see mode (n.1).


quaternary (adj.)

early 15c., consisting of four parts, from Latin quaternarius of four each, containing four, from
quaterni four each, by fours, from quater four times, related to quattuor four (see four). Also as a
noun, the number four (mid-15c.), from Latin quaternarius.    In geological sense, attested from
1843 in English, proposed 1829 by French geologist Jules Pierre Fran&ccedil;ois Stanislas Desnoyers
(1800-1887) as name for the fourth great epoch of geological time, but because it comprises only the
age of man, and the other epochs are many hundred times longer, not all accepted it.


Quatorze

in French terms, fourteen, from French quatorze, from Latin quatuordecim (source also of Italian
quattordici), from quatuor four (see four) + -decim (see -teen).


quatrain (n.)

1580s, from Middle French quatrain four-line stanza (16c.), from Old French quatre four, from Latin
quattuor four (see four).


quatrefoil (n.)

flower with four leaves, early 15c., from Old French quatrefoil, from quatre four (see four) + foil
leaf (see foil (n.)).


quattrocento (n.)

the fifteenth century as a period in art and architecture, 1847, from Italian quattrocento,
literally four hundred, short for mille quattrocento one thousand four hundred, in reference to a
period beginning in 1400; see four + hundred.


quaver (v.)

to vibrate, tremble, early 15c., probably a frequentative of cwavien to tremble, shake (early 13c.),
which probably is related to Low German quabbeln tremble, and possibly of imitative origin. Meaning
sing in trills or quavers first recorded 1530s. Related: Quavered; quavering.


quaver (n.)

1560s, in music, eighth note, from quaver (v.). Meaning a tremble in the voice is from 1748.


quay (n.)

1690s, variant of Middle English key, keye, caye wharf (c.1300; mid-13c. in place names), from Old
North French cai (Old French chai, 12c., Modern French quai) sand bank, from Gaulish caium (5c.),
from Old Celtic *kagio- to encompass, enclose (cognates: Welsh cae fence, hedge, Cornish ke hedge),
from PIE *kagh- to catch, seize; wickerwork, fence (see hedge (n.)). Spelling altered in English by
influence of French quai.


quean (n.)

young, robust woman, Old English cwene woman, also female serf, hussy, prostitute (as in portcwene
public woman), from Proto-Germanic *kwenon (cognates: Old Saxon quan, Old High German quena, Old
Norse kona, Gothic qino wife, woman); see queen. Popular 16c.-17c. in sense hussy. Sense of
effeminate homosexual is recorded from 1935, especially in Australian slang.


queasy (adj.)

mid-15c., kyse, coysy, of uncertain origin, possibly from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse
kveisa boil, perhaps influenced by Anglo-French queisier, from Old French coisier to wound, hurt,
make uneasy, which seems to be from the same Germanic root as kveisa. But the history is obscure and
evidences of development are wanting. Related: Queasily; queasiness.


Quebec

Canadian French province, from Micmac (Algonquian) /kepe:k/ strait, narrows. Related: Quebecois (n.
and adj.), from French Qu&#233;becois.


Quechua (n.)

Indian people of Peru and surrounding regions, 1811, from Spanish, from Quechua kechua plunderer,
destroyer. Also the name of their language. Related: Quechuan.


queen (n.)

Old English cwen queen, female ruler of a state, woman, wife, from Proto-Germanic *kwoeniz
(cognates: Old Saxon quan wife, Old Norse kvaen, Gothic quens), ablaut variant of *kwenon (source of
quean), from PIE *gwen- woman, wife supposedly originally honored woman (cognates: Greek gyn&eacute;
a woman, a wife; Gaelic bean woman; Sanskrit janis a woman, gn&aacute; wife of a god, a goddess;
Avestan jainish wife; Armenian kin woman; Old Church Slavonic zena, Old Prussian genna woman; Gothic
qino a woman, wife; q&eacute;ns a queen).    The original sense seems to have been wife, specialized
by Old English to wife of a king. In Old Norse, still mostly of a wife generally, as in kvan-fang
marriage, taking of a wife, kvanlauss unmarried, widowed, kvan-riki the domineering of a wife.
English is one of the few Indo-European languages to have a word for queen that is not a feminine
derivative of a word for king. The others are Scandinavian: Old Norse drottning, Danish dronning,
Swedish drottning queen, in Old Norse also mistress, but these also are held to be ultimately from
male words, such as Old Norse drottinn master.    Used of chess piece from mid-15c. (as a verb in
chess, in reference to a pawn that has reached the last rank, from 1789), of playing card from
1570s. Of bees from c.1600 (until late 17c., they generally were thought to be kings; as in Henry V,
I.ii); queen bee in a figurative sense is from 1807. Meaning male homosexual (especially a feminine
and ostentatious one) first certainly recorded 1924; probably here an alteration of quean, which is
earlier in this sense. Queen Anne first used 1878 for style characteristic of the time of Queen Anne
of Great Britain and Ireland, who reigned 1702-14. Cincinnati, Ohio, has been the Queen City (of the
West) since 1835.


queenly (adj.)

mid-15c., from queen (n.) + -ly (1). Related: Queenliness.


Queens

New York City borough, named for Catherine of Braganza, queen of English King Charles II.


Queensberry Rules

drawn up 1867 by Sir John Sholto Douglas (1844-1900), 8th Marquis of Queensberry, to govern the
sport of boxing in Great Britain.


Queensland

Australian state, founded 1859 and named for Queen Victoria of Great Britain.


queer (adj.)

c.1500, strange, peculiar, eccentric, from Scottish, perhaps from Low German (Brunswick dialect)
queer oblique, off-center, related to German quer oblique, perverse, odd, from Old High German twerh
oblique, from PIE root *terkw- to turn, twist, wind (see thwart (adv.)).    Sense of homosexual
first recorded 1922; the noun in this sense is 1935, from the adjective. Related: Queerly. Queer
studies as an academic discipline attested from 1994.


queer (v.)

to spoil, ruin, 1812, from queer (adj.). Related: Queered; queering. Earlier it meant to puzzle,
ridicule, cheat (1790). To queer the pitch (1846) is in reference to the patter of an itinerant
tradesman or showman (see pitch (n.1)).    These wanderers, and those who are still seen
occasionally in the back streets of the metropolis, are said to 'go a-pitching ;' the spot they
select for their performance is their 'pitch,' and any interruption of their feats, such as an
accident, or the interference of a policeman, is said to 'queer the pitch,'--in other words, to
spoil it. [Thomas Frost, Circus Life and Circus Celebrities, London, 1875]


queerness (n.)

1680s, strangeness, from queer (adj.) + -ness. Meaning homosexuality is from 1971.


quelch (v.)

1650s, shortening of squelch, perhaps influenced by quench. Related: Quelched; quelching.


quell (v.)

Old English cwellan to kill, murder, execute, from Proto-Germanic *kwaljanan (cognates: Old English
cwelan to die, cwalu violent death; Old Saxon quellian to torture, kill; Old Norse kvelja to
torment; Middle Dutch quelen to vex, tease, torment; Old High German quellan to suffer pain, German
qu&auml;len to torment, torture), from PIE root *gwele- (1) to throw, reach, with extended sense of
to pierce (cognates: Armenian kelem I torture; Old Church Slavonic zali pain; Lithuanian galas end,
gela agony, gelati to sting; see ballistics). Milder sense of suppress, extinguish developed by
c.1300. Related: Quelled; quelling.


queller (n.)

Old English cwellere killer, agent noun from cwellan (see quell).


quench (v.)

Old English acwencan to quench (of fire, light), from Proto-Germanic *cwandjan, probably a causative
form of root of Old English cwincan to go out, be extinguished, Old Frisian kwinka. Related:
Quenched; quenching.


Quentin

masc. proper name, from French, from Latin Quin(c)tianus, from quintus the fifth. Roman children in
large families often were named for their birth order (compare Sextius; also see Octavian).
[P]opular in France from the cult of St Quentin of Amiens, and brought to England by the Normans
[Dictionary of English Surnames], but the popular English form as a surname was Quinton.


Quercus (n.)

Latin quercus oak, from PIE *kwerkwu-, assimilated form of *perkwu- oak (see fir).


querent (n.)

1590s, originally in astrology, from Latin quaerentem, present participle of quaerere (see query
(v.)).


quern (n.)

Old English cweorn hand-mill, mill, from PIE *gwere-na- millstone (cognates: Old Norse kvern, Old
Frisian quern, Old High German quirn, Gothic quirnus; Sanskrit grava crushing stone; Lithuanian
girna millstone, girnos hand mills; Old Church Slavonic zrunuvi mills; Welsh brevan hand mill),
suffixed form of root *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)).


querulous (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French querelos quarrelsome, argumentative and directly from Late Latin querulosus,
from Latin querulus full of complaints, complaining, from queri to complain. Retains the original
vowel of quarrel (n.1). Related: Querulously; querulousness.


query (n.)

1530s, quaere a question, from Latin quaere ask, imperative of quaerere to seek, look for; strive,
endeavor, strive to gain; ask, require, demand; figuratively seek mentally, seek to learn, make
inquiry, probably ultimately from PIE *kwo-, root forming the stem of relative and interrogative
pronouns (see who). Spelling Englished or altered c.1600 by influence of inquiry.


query (v.)

to question, 1650s, from query (n.).  Related: Queried; querying.


quesadilla (n.)

Mexican tortilla with filling of cheese, etc., 1944, from Spanish, diminutive of quesada, type of
cheesecake, from queso cheese, from Latin caeseus (see cheese (n.1)).


quest (n.)

c.1300, an inquest; early 14c., a search for something (especially of judicial inquiries or hounds
seeking game), from Old French queste search, quest, chase, hunt, pursuit; inquest, inquiry (12c.,
Modern French qu&ecirc;te), properly the act of seeking, and directly from Medieval Latin questa
search, inquiry, alteration of Latin quaesitus (fem. quaesita) sought-out, select, past participle
of quaerere seek, gain, ask (see query (n.)). Romance sense of adventure undertaken by a knight
(especially the search for the Grail) is attested from late 14c. Johnson's dictionary has
questmonger Starter of lawsuits or prosecutions.


quest (v.)

mid-14c., to seek game, hunt, from quest (n.) and from Old French quester to search, hunt, from
queste (n.). Related: Quested; questing.


question (n.)

early 13c., philosophical or theological problem; early 14c. as utterance meant to elicit an answer
or discussion, also as a difficulty, a doubt, from Anglo-French questiun, Old French question
question, difficulty, problem; legal inquest, interrogation, torture, from Latin quaestionem
(nominative quaestio) a seeking, a questioning, inquiry, examining, judicial investigation, noun of
action from past participle stem of quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).   No question undoubtedly
is from mid-15c; no questions asked accountability not required is from 1879 (especially in
newspaper advertisements seeking the return of something lost or stolen). Question mark is from
1849, sometimes also question stop (1862); figurative use is from 1869. To be out of the question
(c.1700) is to be not pertinent to the subject, hence not to be considered.


question (v.)

late 15c., from question (n.) and from Middle French questionner ask questions, interrogate, torture
(13c.), from question (n.). Related: Questioned; questioning. Alternative questionize attested from
1847.


questionable (adj.)

1580s, that may be interrogated; c.1600, open to dispute, doubtful, from question (v.) + -able.
Deprecatory sense of dubious in character is attested from 1806. Related: Questionably.


questioner (n.)

1550s, agent noun from question (v.).


questionnaire (n.)

1901, from French questionnaire list of formal questions, from questionner to question, (see
question (v.)). Purists preferred native formation questionary (1540s); see -ary.


quetzal (n.)

central American bird with brilliant plumage, 1827, from Spanish quetzal, from Aztec quetzalli the
bird name, literally tail-feather.


Quetzalcoatl (n.)

plumed serpent god of the Toltecs and Aztecs, 1570s, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) quetzalli (see quetzal)
+ coatl snake.


queue (n.)

late 15c., band attached to a letter with seals dangling on the free end, from French queue a tail,
from Old French cue, coe tail (12c., also penis), from Latin coda (dialectal variant or alternative
form of cauda) tail, of unknown origin. Also in literal use in 16c. English, tail of a beast,
especially in heraldry. The Middle English metaphoric extension to line of dancers (c.1500) led to
extended sense of line of people, etc. (1837). Also used 18c. in sense of braid of hair hanging down
behind (first attested 1748).


queue (v.)

to stand in a line, 1893, from queue (n.). Earlier put hair up in a braid (1777). Related: Queued;
queueing. Churchill is said to have coined Queuetopia (1950), to describe Britain under Labour or
Socialist rule.


queueing (n.)

act or fact of standing in line, 1918, verbal noun from queue (v.).    Queueing had really become an
equivalent for sport with some working-class women. It afforded an occasion and an opportunity for
gossip. [The War of Food in Britain, in The Congregationalist and Advance, April 25, 1918]


quey (n.)

young cow, Scottish and Northern English dialect, late 14c., from Old Norse kviga, apparently from
ku cow (see cow (n.)).


qui vive

1726, in on the qui vive on the alert, from French qui voulez-vous qui vive? sentinel's challenge,
whom do you wish to live, literally (long) live who? In other words, whose side are you on? (The
answer might be Vive la France, Vive le roi, etc.).


quib (n.)

evasion of a point, 1540s, from Latin quibus by what (things)?, dative or ablative plural of quid in
what respect? to what extent?; how? why?, neuter of relative pronoun quis (see who). [A]s a word of
frequent occurrence in legal documents ... hence associated with the 'quirks and quillets' of the
law. [OED]. Also compare quibble.


quibble (n.)

1610s, a pun, a play on words, probably a diminutive of obsolete quib evasion of point at issue,
based on an overuse of Latin quibus? in legal jargon, which supposedly gave it the association with
trivial argument. Meaning equivocation, evasion of the point is attested from 1660s.


quibble (v.)

equivocate, evade the point, turn from the point in question or the plain truth, 1650s, from quibble
(n.). Earlier to pun (1620s). Related: Quibbled; quibbling.


quiche (n.)

1949, from French quiche (1810), from Alsatian German K&uuml;che, diminutive of German Kuchen cake
(see cake (n.)). Became fashionable 1970s; became contemptible 1980s.


quick (adj.)

Old English cwic living, alive, animate, and figuratively, of mental qualities, rapid, ready, from
Proto-Germanic *kwikwaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian quik, Old Norse kvikr living, alive,
Dutch kwik lively, bright, sprightly, Old High German quec lively, German keck bold), from PIE root
*gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Sense of lively, swift developed by late 12c., on notion of full of
life.    NE swift or the now more common fast may apply to rapid motion of any duration, while in
quick (in accordance with its original sense of 'live, lively') there is a notion of 'sudden' or
'soon over.' We speak of a fast horse or runner in a race, a quick starter but not a quick horse. A
somewhat similar feeling may distinguish NHG schnell and rasch or it may be more a matter of local
preference. [Buck]    Of persons, mentally active, from late 15c. Also in Middle English used of
soft soils, gravel pits, etc. where the ground is shifting and yielding (mid-14c., compare
quicksand). As an adverb from c.1300. To be quick about something is from 1937. Quick buck is from
1946, American English. Quick-change artist (1886) originally was an actor expert in playing
different roles in the same performance of a show. Quick-witted is from 1520s.


quick (n.)

living persons, Old English cwic, from quick (adj.); frequently paired with the dead, as in Old
English cwicum &amp; deadum. The quick tender part of the flesh (under a nail, etc.) is from 1520s,
as is the figurative use of it.


quick-march (n.)

1752, from quick (adj.) + march (n.1).


quick-step (n.)

1802, from quick (adj.) + step (n.). From 1906 as a verb. Related: quick-stepped; quick-stepping.


quicken (v.)

c.1300, come to life; give life to, from quick (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning become faster is from 1805.
Related: Quickened; quickening. An earlier verb was simply quick (c.1200), from Old English
gecwician.


quickie (n.)

sex act done hastily, 1940, from quick (adj.) + -ie. As alcoholic drink meant to be taken hurriedly,
from 1941 (quick one in this sense from 1928). From 1926 as motion picture made in a short time.


quicklime (n.)

late 14c., from quick (adj.) living + lime (n.1). A loan-translation of Latin calx viva. So called
perhaps for being unquenched, or for the vigorousness of its qualities; compare Old English cwicfyr
sulfur.


quickly (adv.)

late Old English cwiculice vigorously, keenly; see quick (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning rapidly, in a
short space of time is from c.1200.


quickness (n.)

c.1200, state of being alive, from quick (adj.) + -ness. Early 15c. as alacrity; mid-15c. as
readiness of perception.


quicksand (n.)

c.1300, from Middle English quyk living (see quick (adj.)) + sond sand (see sand (n.)). Old English
had cwecesund, but this might have meant lively strait of water.


quickset (adj.)

formed of living plants, 1530s, from quick (adj.) + set (v.).


quicksilver (n.)

Old English cwicseolfor, literally living silver, translating Latin argentum vivum (source also of
Italian argento vivo), literally living silver; so called from its liquid mobility. See quick (adj.)
+ silver (n.). Similar formation in Dutch kwikzilver, Old High German quecsilbar, German
quecksilber, French vif-argent, Italian argenta viva.


quid (n.1)

bite-sized piece (of tobacco, etc.), 1727, dialectal variant of Middle English cudde, from Old
English cudu, cwidu (see cud).


quid (n.2)

one pound sterling, 1680s, British slang, possibly from quid that which is, essence, (c.1600, see
quiddity), as used in quid pro quo (q.v.), or directly from Latin quid what, something, anything.
Compare French quibus, noted in Barr&#234;re's dictionary of French argot (1889) for money, cash,
said to be short for quibus fiunt omnia.


quid pro quo

1560s, from Latin, literally something for something, one thing for another, from nominative and
ablative neuter singulars of relative pronoun qui who (see who) + pro for (see pro-) + quo, ablative
of quid.


quiddity (n.)

a trifling nicety in argument, a quibble, 1530s, from Medieval Latin quidditas the essence of
things, in Scholastic philosophy, that which distinguishes a thing from other things, literally
whatness, from Latin quid what, neuter of indefinite pronoun quis somebody, someone or other (see
who). Sense developed from scholastic disputes over the nature of things. Original classical meaning
real essence or nature of a thing is attested in English from late 14c.


quidnunc (n.)

gossip-monger, 1709, formed from Latin quid what? (neuter of interrogative pronoun quis who?; see
who) and nunc now (see now), to describe someone forever asking What's the news?


quiesce (v.)

1821, from Latin quiescere (see quiescent).


quiescence (n.)

1630s, from Latin quiescentia, from quiescere (see quiescent).


quiescent (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin quiescentem (nominative quiescens), present participle of quiescere, inchoative
verb formed from quies rest, quiet (see quiet (n.)).


quiet (adj.)

late 14c., peaceable, at rest, restful, tranquil, from Old French quiet and directly from Latin
quietus calm, at rest, free from exertion, from quies (genitive quietis) rest (see quiet (n.)). As
an adverb from 1570s. Related: Quietly; quietness.


quiet (n.)

c.1300, freedom from disturbance or conflict; calm, stillness, from Old French quiete rest, repose,
tranquility and directly from Latin quies (genitive quietis) a lying still, rest, repose, peace,
from PIE root *kweie- (2) to rest, be quiet (cognates: Old Persian shiyati-, Avestan shaiti- well-
being; Avestan shyata- happy; Gothic hveila, Old English hwil space of time; see while (n.)). Late
14c. as inactivity, rest, repose.


quiet (v.)

late 14c., subdue, lessen, from quiet (adj.) and in part from Latin quietare. From mid-15c. as to
make silent, cause to be quiet; intransitive sense of become quiet, be silent is from 1791. Related:
Quieted; quieting.


quieten (v.)

1828, to make quiet; 1890, to become quiet, from quiet (adj.) + -en (1).


quietism (n.)

1680s, from Italian quietismo, literally passiveness, from quieto calm, at rest, from Latin quietus
(see quiet (adj.)). Originally in reference to the mysticism of Miguel Molinos (1640-1697), Spanish
priest in Rome, whose Guida spirituale was published 1675 and condemned by the Inquisition in 1685.
Related: Quietist.


quietude (n.)

1590s, from Middle French qui&eacute;tude (c.1500) or directly from Late Latin quietudo, from Latin
quietus (see quiet (n.)).


quietus (n.)

discharge, clearing of accounts, 1530s, short for Medieval Latin phrase quietus est he is quit (see
quit). Hence, death (i.e. final discharge), c.1600. Latin quies also was used for the peace of
death.


quiff (n.)

curl or lock of hair over the forehead, 1890, originally a style among soldiers, of unknown origin.
Perhaps connected with quiff a puff or whiff of tobacco smoke (1831, originally Southern U.S.), held
to be a variant of whiff (n.).


quill (n.)

c.1400, piece of reed or hollow stem of a feather, probably related to Middle High German kil quill,
from Low German quiele, of unknown origin. Meaning pen made from a (goose) quill is from 1550s; that
of porcupine spine is from c.1600.


quillet (n.)

a quibble, obsolete, prob. a corruption of L. quidlibet 'what you please' [Klein].


quilt (n.)

c.1300, mattress with soft lining, from Anglo-French quilte, Old French cuilte, coute quilt,
mattress (12c.), from Latin culcita mattress, bolster, of unknown origin. Sense of thick outer bed
covering is first recorded 1590s.


quilt (v.)

1550s, from quilt (n.). Related: Quilted; quilting. Quilting bee attested from 1824 (see bee).


quilter (n.)

late 13c. (late 12c. as a surname); agent noun from quilt (v.).


quim (n.)

slang for female genitalia, vulva, vagina, 1735, perhaps 1610s, of unknown origin. Coarse and
disparaging use for  females collectively is from 1935.


quin (n.)

1935, short for quintuplet, one of five.


quinary (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin quinarius consisting of five, containing five, from quint five each (see five).


quince (n.)

early 14c., plural of quoyn, from Old French cooin (Modern French coing), from Vulgar Latin
codoneum, from Latin cotoneum malum quince fruit, probably a variant of cydonium malum, from Greek
kydonion malon apple of Kydonia (modern Khania), ancient seaport city in Crete.    The plant is
native to Persia, Anatolia, and Greece; the Greeks imported grafts for their native plants from a
superior strain in Crete, hence the name. Kodu- also was the Lydian name for the fruit. Italian
cotogno, German Quitte, etc. all are ultimately from the Greek word.


quincunx (n.)

1640s, originally astrological, of planetary alignments, from Latin, literally five twelfths
(especially five unciae, that is, five-twelfths of an as, the basic unit of Roman currency), from
quinque five (see quinque-) + uncia ounce; a twelfth part (of anything), related to unus one (see
one). Applied, especially in garden design, to arrangements like the five pips on a playing card
(1660s). Related: Quincuncial.


quinella (n.)

form of betting in which the bettor picks the first and second horses in a given race, 1942,
American English, from American Spanish quiniela, originally a ball game with five players, from
Latin quini five each, from quinque five (see quinque-). The sense evolution in Spanish was said to
be from the game to a wager on the scores of the players, hence any wager against the house.


quinine (n.)

alkaloid responsible for curative properties in the cinchona tree, 1821, from French quinine (1820),
with chemical ending -ine (2) + Spanish quina cinchona bark (from which it is extracted), from
Quechua (Peru) kina. Earlier in reduplicated form quinaquina (1727).


quinoa (n.)

1620s, from Spanish spelling of Quechua kinua.


quinque-

before vowels quinqu-, word-forming element meaning five, having five, from Latin quinque five, by
assimilation from PIE *penkwe (see five).


quinquennial (adj.)

late 15c., lasting five years, from Latin quinquennis of five years, celebrated every fifth year,
from quinque- five (see quinque-) + ending from biennial, etc. Meaning happening once every five
years attested from c.1600. As a noun from 1895; earlier quinquennal (1610s).


quinsy (n.)

severe sore throat, late 14c., qwinaci, from Old French quinancie (Modern French esquinacie), from
Late Latin cynanche, from Greek kynankhe sore throat, also dog collar, literally dog-choking, from
kyon (genitive kynos) dog (see canine) + ankhein to strangle, cognate with Latin angere (see anger
(v.)).


quint (n.)

1520s, a tax of one-fifth, from Middle French quint, from Latin quintus the fifth, ordinal to
quinque five (see quinque-). Used in English of various groups of five since 17c. First attested
1935 as a shortening of quintuplet (American English; British English prefers quin); used originally
of the Dionne quintuplets, born May 28, 1934, near Callander, Ontario, Canada.


quinta (n.)

country house, villa, 1754, from Spanish and Portuguese quinta, originally a farm and house let out
for a rent of one-fifth of its produce, from Latin quintus one fifth, related to quinque five (see
quinque-).


quintain (n.)

target for tilting and jousting practice, c.1400 (in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c.), from Old French
quintaine or directly from Medieval Latin quintana; perhaps from Latin quintana of the fifth (see
quinque-), which as a noun meant the business part of a camp, on the supposition that this was where
military exercises were done [OED].


quintal (n.)

a weight of a hundred pounds, c.1400, from Old French quintal hundredweight, and directly from
Medieval Latin quintale, from Arabic quintar, from Late Greek kentenarion, from Latin centenarius
containing a hundred (see centenary).


quintessence (n.)

early 15c., in ancient and medieval philosophy, pure essence, substance of which the heavenly bodies
are composed, literally fifth essence, from Middle French quinte essence (14c.), from Medieval Latin
quinta essentia, from Latin quinta, fem. of quintus fifth (see quinque-) + essentia (see Parousia).
A loan-translation of Greek pempte ousia, the ether added by Aristotle to the four known elements
(water, earth, fire, air) and said to permeate all things. Its extraction was one of the chief goals
of alchemy. Sense of purest essence (of a situation, character, etc.) is first recorded 1580s.


quintessential (adj.)

c.1600, purest, most refined, from quintessence (Medieval Latin quint essentia) + -al (1). Related:
Quintessentially.


quintet (n.)

1811, composition for five voices, from Italian quintetto, diminutive of quinto fifth, from Latin
quintus the fifth, related to quinque five (see quinque-). Meaning set of five singers or players is
from 1882.


quintile (n.)

1610s, originally in astrology, from Latin quintus the fifth (see quinque-) + -ile, from quartile.
Use in statistics dates to 1951.


quintillion (n.)

1670s, from Latin quintus the fifth (see quinque-) + ending from million. Compare billion. In Great
Britain, the fifth power of a million (1 followed by 30 zeroes); in U.S. the sixth power of a
thousand (1 followed by 18 zeroes).


quintuple (adj.)

1560s, from French quintuple (15c.), from Late Latin quintuplex, from Latin quintus fifth (related
to quinque five; see quinque-) on model of quadruple. Related: Quintuplicate.


quintuple (v.)

1630s, from quintuple (adj.) or from French quintupler (v.). Related: Quintupled; quintupling.


quintuplet (n.)

1873, set of five things (originally in music), from quintuple (adj.) with ending from triplet. In
plural, five children at one birth it is recorded from 1889.


quinzane (n.)

group of fifteen, 1856, from French quinzaine (12c.), from quinze fifteen, from Latin quindecim (see
fifteen).


quip (n.)

1530s, variant of quippy in same sense (1510s), perhaps from Latin quippe indeed, of course, as you
see, naturally, obviously (used sarcastically), from quid what (neuter of pronoun quis who; see
who), and compare quibble (n.)) + emphatic particle -pe.


quip (v.)

make a quip, 1570s, from quip (n.). Related: Quipped; quipping.


quipu (n.)

ancient Inca recording device using knotted cords, 1704, from Quechua quipu knot.


quire (n.1)

c.1200, set of four folded pages for a book; pamphlet consisting of a single quire, from Anglo-
French quier, Old French quaier sheet of paper folded in four, from Vulgar Latin *quaternus, from
Latin quaterni four each, from quater four times. Meaning standard unit for selling paper first
recorded late 14c. In quires (late 15c.) means unbound.


quire (n.2)

early form and later variant spelling of choir (q.v.).


Quirinal

royal palace in Rome, 1838, from Mons Quirinalis in Rome (one of the seven hills, site of a former
Papal palace), from Quirinus, said to be the divine name of Romulus, but really one of the original
trinity of Roman gods, representing Mars. His feast (Quirinalia) was Feb. 17. Used metonymically for
the Italian civil government (1917), especially as distinguished from the Vatican.


quirk (n.)

1560s, quibble, evasion, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to German quer (see queer (adj.)) via
notion of twisting and slanting; but its earliest appearance in western England dialect seems to
argue against this source. Perhaps originally a technical term for a twist or flourish in weaving.
Sense of peculiarity is c.1600.


quirky (adj.)

1806, shifty, from quirk + -y (2). Sense of idiosyncratic first recorded 1960. Related: Quirkily;
quirkiness.


quirt (n.)

short-handled braided leather riding whip, 1845, from Mexican Spanish cuarta rope, related to
Spanish cuerda rope, from Latin corda (see cord (n.)).


quisling (n.)

1940, from Vidkun Quisling (1887-1945), Norwegian fascist politician who headed the puppet
government during the German occupation of Norway in World War II; shot for treason after German
defeat. First used in London Times of April 15, 1940, in a Swedish context.


quit (v.)

c.1200, to repay, discharge (a debt, etc.), from Old French quiter clear, establish one's innocence;
also transitive, release, let go, relinquish, abandon (12c.), from quite (see quit (adj.)).
Meaning to reward, give reward is mid-13c., that of take revenge; to answer, retort and to acquit
oneself are late 14c. From c.1300 as to acquit (of a charge), declare not guilty. Sense of leave,
depart is attested from c.1400; that of stop (doing something) is from 1640s. Meaning to give up,
relinquish is from mid-15c. Related: Quitted; quitting. Quitting time is from 1835.


quit (adj.)

c.1200, free, clear (of debt, etc.), from Old French quite, quitte free, clear, entire, at liberty;
discharged; unmarried, from Medieval Latin quitus, quittus, from Latin quietus free (in Medieval
Latin free from war, debts, etc.), also calm, resting (see quiet (adj.)).


quit-rent (n.)

early 15c., rent paid by a tenant in exchange for being discharged from required service; also,
nominal rent as acknowledgment of tenure, from quit (adj.) + rent (n.).


quitclaim (n.)

a relinquishing of a legal right or claim, c.1300, from Anglo-French quiteclame; see quit (v.) +
claim (n.). Compare Old French clamer quitte to give up (a right).


quite (adv.)

early 14c., adverbial form of Middle English quit, quite (adj.) free, clear (see quit (adj.)).
Originally thoroughly; the weaker sense of fairly is attested from mid-19c.


quits (adj.)

even (with another), 1660s; earlier discharged of a liability (c.1200), perhaps from Medieval Latin
quittus (see quit (adj.)).


quittance (n.)

c.1200, payment, compensation; c.1300, discharge from an obligation, from Old French quitance
(Modern French quittance), from quiter (see quit (v.)).


quitter (n.)

as an insult, 1881, American English, agent noun from quit (v.).


quiver (v.)

to tremble, late 15c., perhaps imitative, or possibly an alteration of quaveren (see quaver), or
from Old English cwifer- (in cwiferlice zealously), which is perhaps related to cwic alive (see
quick). Related: Quivered; quivering. As a noun in this sense from 1715, from the verb.


quiver (n.)

case for holding arrows, early 14c., from Anglo-French quiveir, Old French quivre, cuivre, probably
of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *kukur container (cognates: Old High German kohhari, German
K&#246;cher, Old Saxon kokar, Old Frisian koker, Old English cocur quiver); said to be from the
language of the Huns [Barnhart]. Related: Quiverful.


quixotic (adj.)

extravagantly chivalrous, 1791, from Don Quixote, romantic, impractical hero of Cervantes' satirical
novel Don Quixote de la Mancha (1605; English translation by 1620). His name literally means thigh,
also a cuisse (a piece of armor for the thigh), in Modern Spanish quijote, from Latin coxa hip.
Related: Quixotical; quixotically.


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


quiz (v.)

1847, to question, quies, perhaps from Latin qui es? who are you?, first question in oral exams in
Latin in old-time grammar schools. Spelling quiz first recorded 1886, though it was in use as a noun
spelling from 1854, perhaps in this case from apparently unrelated slang word quiz odd person (1782,
source of quizzical). Compare quisby queer, not quite right; bankrupt (slang from 1807). From the
era of radio quiz shows comes quizzee (n.), 1940.


quizzical (adj.)

1789, from quiz odd or eccentric person (1782), of unknown origin (see quiz (n.)) + -ical. Related:
Quizzically.


quo warranto

Medieval Latin, literally by what warrant, from quo from, with, or by whom or what?, ablative of
interrogative pronoun quis who? (see who).


quod

prison, c.1700, a cant slang word of unknown origin; perhaps a variant of quad in the building
quadrangle sense.


quodlibet (n.)

a nicety, subtlety, late 14c., Latin, literally what you will, what you please, from quod what,
neuter of qui (see who) + libet it pleases (see love (n.)).


quoin (n.)

1530s, a cornerstone, variant spelling of coin (n.); in early use also in other senses of that word,
including a wedge.


quoit (n.)

late 14c., curling stone, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French coite flat stone (with which
the game was originally played), literally cushion, variant of coilte (see quilt (n.)). Quoits were
among the games prohibited by Edward III and Richard II to encourage archery. In reference to a
heavy flat iron ring (and the tossing game played with it) it is recorded from mid-15c.


quoits (n.)

late 14c., coytes game played by throwing quoits; see quoit.


quondam (adj.)

one-time, former, 1580s, from earlier use as an adverb (formerly) and a noun (former holder of some
office or position), both 1530s, from Latin quondam (adv.) formerly, at some time, at one time; once
in a while, from quom, cum when, as (see who) + demonstrative ending -dam.


Quonset hut

1942, from Quonset Point Naval Air Station, Rhode Island, where this type of structure was first
built, 1941. The place name is from a southern New England Algonquian language and perhaps means
small, long place.


quorate (adj.)

attended by a quorum, 1969, from quorum + -ate (1).


quorum (n.)

early 15c., in reference to certain eminent justices of the peace, from Latin quorum of whom,
genitive plural (masc. and neuter; fem. quarum) of qui who (see who). The traditional wording of the
commission appointing justices of the peace translates as, We have also assigned you, and every two
or more of you (of whom [quoram vos] any one of you the aforesaid A, B, C, D, etc. we will shall be
one) our justices to inquire the truth more fully. The justices so-named usually were called the
justices of the quorum. Meaning fixed number of members whose presence is necessary to transact
business is first recorded 1610s.


quota (n.)

1660s, from Medieval Latin quota, from Latin quota pars how large a part, from quota, fem. singular
of quotus which, what number (in sequence); see quote (v.). Earliest reference is to contributions
of soldiers or supplies levied from a town or district; immigration sense is from 1921.


quotable (adj.)

1804, from quote (v.) + -able. Related: Quotably.


quotation (n.)

mid-15c., numbering, later (1530s) marginal notation, noun of action from quote (v.) or else from
Medieval Latin quotationem (nominative quotatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
quotare to number. Meaning an act of quoting is from 1640s; that of passage quoted is from 1680s.
Quotation marks attested by 1777.


quote (v.)

late 14c., coten, to mark (a book) with chapter numbers or marginal references, from Old French
coter, from Medieval Latin quotare distinguish by numbers, number chapters, from Latin quotus which
in order? what number (in sequence)?, from quot how many, from PIE *kwo-ti-, from pronomial root
*kwo- (see who).    The sense development is via to give as a reference, to cite as an authority
(1570s) to to copy out or repeat exact words (1670s). Modern spelling with qu- is from early 15c.
The business sense of to state the price of a commodity (1866) revives the etymological meaning.
Related: Quoted; quoting.


quote (n.)

a quotation, 1885, from quote (v.). From c.1600 as a marginal reference. Quotes for quotation marks
is from 1869.


quoth (v.)

Old English cw&aelig;&eth;, third person singular past tense of cwe&eth;an to say, speak; name,
call; declare, proclaim (Middle English quethan), from Proto-Germanic *kwithan (cognates: Old Saxon
quethan, Old Norse kve&eth;a, Old Frisian quetha, Old High German quedan, Gothic qi&thorn;an), from
PIE root *gwet- to say, speak (see bequeath). Compare also archaic quotha said he (1510s) for Old
English cw&aelig;&eth;e ge think you?


quotidian (adj.)

mid-14c., everyday, daily, from Old French cotidian (Modern French quotidien), from Latin
quotidianus daily, from Latin quotus how many? which in order or number? (see quote (v.)) + dies day
(see diurnal). Meaning ordinary, commonplace, trivial is from mid-15c.


quotient (n.)

number of times one quantity is contained in another, mid-15c., from Latin quotiens how often? how
many times?; as often as, pronomial adverb of time, from quot how many? (see quote (v.)). The Latin
adverb quotiens was mistaken in Middle English for a present participle in -ens.


Quran (n.)

1876, variant spelling (preferred by scholars) of Koran (q.v.), from Arabic qur'an, literally book,
reading, recitation, from qara'a to read. Related: Quranic.


qwerty

1929, from the first six keys on a standard typewriter keyboard, read as though text, from top left.
Mechanical typewriter patented 1867; the QWERTY layout itself is said to date to 1887, dominant in
U.S. from early 20c.; it is not meant to slow down typists, but to separate the letters in common
digraphs (-sh-, -ck-, etc.) to reduce jamming of swing-arms in old-style machines. It actually
speeds typing by requiring alternate-hand strokes, which is one reason the alternative DVORAK
keyboard is not appreciably faster. Remnants of the original alphabetic typewriter keyboard remain
in the second row of letter keys: FGH-JKL. The French standard was AZERTY; in Germany, QWERTZ; in
Italy, QZERTY.


