-y (4)

suffix indicating state, condition, or quality; also activity or the result of it (as in victory,
history, etc.), via Anglo-French and Old French &#233;, from Latin -ia, Greek -ia, from PIE *-a-,
suffix forming abstract or collective nouns. It is etymologically identical with -ia and the second
element in -cy, -ery, -logy, etc.


-y (3)

suffix in pet proper names (such as Johnny, Kitty), first recorded in Scottish c.1400; according to
OED it became frequent in English 15c.-16c. Extension to surnames seems to date from c.1940. Use
with common nouns seems to have begun in Scottish with laddie (1546) and become popular in English
due to Burns' poems, but the same formation appears to be represented much earlier in baby and
puppy.


-y (1)

noun suffix, in army, city, country, etc., from Old French -e, Latin -atus, -atum, past participle
suffix of verbs of the first conjugation.


-y (2)

adjective suffix, full of or characterized by, from Old English -ig, from Proto-Germanic *-iga-
(source also of Dutch, Danish, German -ig, Gothic -egs), from PIE -(i)ko-, adjectival suffix,
cognate with elements in Greek -ikos, Latin -icus (see -ic). Originally added to nouns in Old
English; used from 13c. with verbs, and by 15c. even with other adjectives (for example crispy).


-yer

agent noun suffix, variant of -ier used after a vowel or -w-.


-yl

chemical suffix used in forming names of radicals, from French -yle, from Greek hyle wood, also
building stuff, raw material (from which something is made), of unknown origin. The use in chemistry
traces to the latter sense (except in methylene, where it means wood).    It was introduced into
chemical nomenclature by Liebig and Wohler when, in 1832, they used the term benzoyle for the
radical which appeared to be the essential material of benzoic acid and related compounds. [Flood]


Y

a late-developing letter in English. Called ipsilon in German, upsilon in Greek, the English name is
of obscure origin. The sound at the beginning of yard, yes, yield, etc. is from Old English words
with initial g- as in got and y- as in yet, which were considered the same sound and often
transcribed as &#540;, known as yogh. The system was altered by French scribes, who brought over the
continental use of -g- and from the early 1200s used -y- and sometimes -gh- to replace &#540;. As
short for YMCA, etc., by 1915.


y&#039;all (pron.)

by 1879, U.S. dialect abbreviation of you all (see you, and compare yins).    Children learn from
the slaves some odd phrases ... as ... will you all do this? for, will one of you do this? [Arthur
Singleton (Henry C. Knight), Letters from the South and West, 1824]   We-all for us is attested by
1865; we-uns by 1864. Who-all attested from 1899.


y-

perfective prefix, in yclept, etc.; a deliberate archaism, introduced by Spenser and his imitators,
representing an authentic Middle English prefix, from Old English ge-, originally meaning with,
together but later a completive or perfective element, from Proto-Germanic *ga- together, with (also
a collective and intensive prefix), from PIE *kom beside, near, by, with (cognate with Sanskrit ja-,
Latin com-, cum-; see com-). It is still living in German and Dutch ge-, and survives, disguised, in
some English words (such as alike, aware, handiwork).    Among hundreds of Middle English words it
formed are yfallen, yhacked (completely hacked, probably now again useful), yknow, ymarried,
ywrought.


yacht (n.)

1550s, yeaghe a light, fast-sailing ship, from Norwegian jaght or early Dutch jaght, both from
Middle Low German jacht, shortened form of jachtschip fast pirate ship, literally ship for chasing,
from jacht chase, from jagen to chase, hunt, from Old High German jagon, from Proto-Germanic *yago-,
from PIE root *yek- (2) to hunt (cognates: Hittite ekt- hunting net). Related: Yachting; yachtsman.


yack (v.)

also yak, to talk, to chatter, 1950, slang, probably short for yackety-yacking talk (1947), probably
echoic (compare Australian slang yacker talk, conversation, 1882). Related: Yacked; yacking.


yadda-yadda

and so on, 1990s, of echoic origin (compare yatata talk idly, chatter, 1940s; and yatter to talk
incessantly or idly, 1825).


yah (interj.)

exclamation of defiance or dismissal, from 1812. Extended form yah-boo by 1910.


yahoo (n.)

a brute in human form, 1726, from the race of brutish human creatures in Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
A made name, prob. meant to suggest disgust [Century Dictionary]. Freq. in mod. use, a person
lacking cultivation or sensibility, a philistine; a lout; a hooligan [OED]. The internet search
engine so called from 1994.


Yahtzee (n.)

dice game, 1957, proprietary (E.S. Lowe Co., N.Y.), apparently based on yacht.


Yahweh

1869, hypothetical reconstruction of the tetragrammaton YHWH (see Jehovah), based on the assumption
that the tetragrammaton is the imperfective of Hebrew verb hawah, earlier form of hayah was, in the
sense of the one who is, the existing.


yak (n.)

wild ox of central Asia, 1795, from Tibetan g-yag male yak. Attested in French from 1791.


yak (v.)

laugh, 1938, variant of yuck (2); talk idly, 1950, variant of yack. Related: Yakked; yakking.


Yakima

Native American people of Washington State, 1852, perhaps from Sahaptin /iyakima/ pregnant women.


yakuza (n.)

traditional Japanese organized crime cartel, literally eight-nine-three (ya, ku, sa) the losing hand
in the traditional baccarat-like Japanese card game Oicho-Kabu. The notion may be good for nothing,
or bad luck (such as that suffered by someone who runs afoul of them), or it may be a reference to
the fact that a player who draws this hand requires great skill to win.


Yale

university in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S., founded 1701 as Collegiate School, renamed 1718 in honor
of a gift from British merchant-philanthropist Elihu Yale (1649-1721). As a kind of lock,  1854,
invented by U.S. mechanic Linus Yale Jr. (1821-1868). The surname is Welsh, from ial, and means
dweller at the fertile upland. Related: Yalie.


yam (n.)

1580s, igname (current form by 1690s), from Portuguese inhame or Spanish igname, from a West African
language (compare Fulani nyami to eat; Twi anyinam species of yam); the word in American and
Jamaican English probably is directly from West African sources. The Malay name is ubi, whence
German &#246;biswurzel.


yammer (v.)

late 15c., to lament, probably from Middle Dutch jammeren and cognate Middle English yeoumeren, to
mourn, complain, from Old English geomrian to lament, from geomor sorrowful, probably of imitative
origin. Cognate with Old Saxon jamar sad, sorrowful, German Jammer lamentation, misery. Meaning to
make loud, annoying noise is attested from 1510s. Related: Yammered; yammering.


yang (n.)

masculine or positive principle in Chinese philosophy, 1670s, from Mandarin yang, said to mean
male, daylight, solar, or sun, positive, male genitals.


yank (v.)

to pull, jerk, 1822, Scottish, of unknown origin. Related: Yanked; yanking. The noun is 1818 in
sense of sudden blow, cuff; 1856 (American English) as a sudden pull.


Yank (n.)

abbreviated form of Yankee, 1778.


Yankee (n.)

1683, a name applied disparagingly by Dutch settlers in New Amsterdam (New York) to English
colonists in neighboring Connecticut. It may be from Dutch Janke, literally Little John, diminutive
of common personal name Jan; or it may be from Jan Kes familiar form of John Cornelius, or perhaps
an alteration of Jan Kees, dialectal variant of Jan Kaas, literally John Cheese, the generic
nickname the Flemings used for Dutchmen.    [I]t is to be noted that it is common to name a droll
fellow, regarded as typical of his country, after some favorite article of food, as E[nglish] Jack-
pudding, G[erman] Hanswurst (Jack Sausage), F[rench] Jean Farine (Jack Flour). [Century Dictionary,
1902, entry for macaroni]    Originally it seems to have been applied insultingly to the Dutch,
especially freebooters, before they turned around and slapped it on the English. A less-likely
theory (attested by 1832) is that it represents some southern New England Algonquian language
mangling of English. In English a term of contempt (1750s) before its use as a general term for
native of New England (1765); during the American Revolution it became a disparaging British word
for all American natives or inhabitants. Contrasted with southerner by 1828. Shortened form Yank in
reference to an American first recorded 1778. Latin-American form Yanqui attested in English by 1914
(in Mexican Spanish by 1835).    The rule observed in this country is, that the man who receives
that name [Yankee] must come from some part north of him who gives it. To compensate us for giving
each other nicknames, John Bull lumps us all together, and calls us all Yankees. [Who is a Yankee?
Massachusetts Spy, June 6, 1827]


Yankee Doodle (n.)

popular tune of the American Revolution, apparently written c.1755 by British Army surgeon Dr.
Richard Schuckburgh while campaigning with Amherst's force in upper New York during the French and
Indian War. The original verses mocked the colonial troops (see Yankee) serving alongside the
regulars, and the Doodle element might have been, or hinted at, the 18c. slang term for penis. The
song naturally was popular with British troops in the colonies during the Revolutionary War, but
after the colonials began to win skirmishes with them in 1775, they took the tune as a patriotic
prize and re-worked the lyrics. The current version seems to have been written in 1776 by Edward
Bangs, a Harvard sophomore who also was a Minuteman.


yap (v.)

1660s, bark as a (small) dog, earlier as a noun, yapping dog (c.1600), probably of imitative origin.
Compare verb yamph in same sense (1718). Originally in reference to dog sounds; meaning to talk idle
chatter is first recorded 1886. Related: Yapped; yapping. As a noun, 1826 in reference to the sound;
1900, American English slang as mouth.


yappy (adj.)

1909, from yap + -y (2).


yar

growling sound, imitative, attested from c.1300.


Yarborough (n.)

in bridge/whist, a hand with no card above a nine, 1874, said to be so called for an unnamed Earl of
Yarborough who bet 1,000 to 1 against its occurrence.


yard (n.1)

patch of ground around a house, Old English geard fenced enclosure, garden, court; residence, house,
from Proto-Germanic *gardaz (cognates: Old Norse gar&eth;r enclosure, garden, yard; Old Frisian
garda, Dutch gaard, Old High German garto, German Garten garden; Gothic gards house, garda stall),
from PIE *ghor-to-, suffixed form of root *gher- (1) to grasp, enclose, with derivatives meaning
enclosure (cognates: Old English gyrdan to gird, Sanskrit ghra- house, Albanian garth hedge, Latin
hortus garden, Phrygian -gordum town, Greek khortos pasture, Old Irish gort field, Breton garz
enclosure, garden, and second element in Latin cohors enclosure, yard, company of soldiers,
multitude).    Lithuanian gardas pen, enclosure, Old Church Slavonic gradu town, city, and Russian
gorod, -grad town, city belong to this group, but linguists dispute whether they are independent
developments or borrowings from Germanic. As college campus enclosed by the main buildings, 1630s.
In railway usage, ground adjacent to a train station or terminus, used for switching or coupling
trains, 1827. Yard sale is attested by 1976.


yard (n.2)

measure of length, Old English gerd (Mercian), gierd (West Saxon) rod, staff, stick; measure of
length, from West Germanic *gazdijo, from Proto-Germanic *gazdjo- stick, rod (cognates: Old Saxon
gerda, Old Frisian ierde, Dutch gard rod; Old High German garta, German gerte switch, twig, Old
Norse gaddr spike, sting, nail), from PIE root *ghazdh-o- rod, staff, pole (cognates: Latin hasta
shaft, staff). The nautical yard-arm retains the original sense of stick.    Originally in Anglo-
Saxon times a land measure of roughly 5 meters (a length later called rod, pole, or perch). Modern
measure of three feet is attested from late 14c. (earlier rough equivalent was the ell of 45 inches,
and the verge). In Middle English and after, the word also was a euphemism for penis (as in Love's
Labour's Lost, V.ii.676). Slang meaning one hundred dollars first attested 1926, American English.
Middle English yerd (Old English gierd) also was yard-land, yard of land, a varying measure but
often about 30 acres or a quarter of a hide.


yard-arm (n.)

also yardarm, 1550s, from yard (n.2) in the nautical sense (attested from Old English) + arm (n.1).
In 19c. British naval custom, it was permissible to begin drinking when the sun was over the yard-
arm.


yardage (n.)

aggregate number of yards, 1900 in sports, from yard (n.2) + -age.


yardbird (n.)

convict, 1956, from yard (n.1) + bird (n.1), from the notion of prison yards; earlier it meant basic
trainee (World War II armed forces slang).


yardstick (n.)

also yard-stick, 1797, from yard (n.2) + stick (n.).


yare (adj.)

ready, prepared, Old English gearo ready, prepared, equipped, from gearwian to equip, prepare
(related to gearwe clothing, dress) from Proto-Germanic *garwian to make, prepare, equip, ready,
complete (see gear (n.)). Cognate with German gar, Dutch gaar. Related: Yarely.


yarmulke (n.)

1903, from Yiddish yarmulke, from Polish jarmu&#322;ka, originally a skullcap worn by priests,
perhaps ultimately from Medieval Latin almutia cowl, hood.


yarn (n.)

Old English gearn spun fiber, spun wool, from Proto-Germanic *garnan (cognates: Old Norse, Old High
German, German garn, Middle Dutch gaern, Dutch garen yarn), from PIE root *ghere- intestine, gut,
entrail (cognates: Old Norse gorn gut, Sanskrit hira vein; entrails, Latin hernia rupture, Greek
khorde intestine, gut-string, Lithuanian zarna gut). The phrase to spin a yarn to tell a story is
first attested 1812, from a sailors' expression, on notion of telling stories while engaged in
sedentary work such as yarn-twisting.


yarrow (n.)

plant, also known as milfoil, Old English gearwe yarrow, from Proto-Germanic *garwo (cognates:
Middle Dutch garwe, Old High German garawa, German Garbe), perhaps from a source akin to the root of
yellow (adj.).


yaw (v.)

to fall away from the line of a course, 1580s (as a noun 1540s), perhaps ultimately from Old Norse
jaga, Old Danish j&aelig;ge to drive, chase, from Middle Low German jagen (see yacht).


yawl (n.)

type of ship's boat, 1660s, apparently from Middle Low German jolle or Dutch jol a Jutland boat
(according to a 1708 source), of uncertain origin. Also borrowed into French (yole), Italian (jolo),
Russian (yal).


yawn (v.)

c.1300, yenen, yonen, from Old English ginian, gionian open the mouth wide, yawn, gape, from Proto-
Germanic *gin- (cognates: Old Norse gina to yawn, Dutch geeuwen, Old High German ginen, German
g&auml;hnen to yawn), from PIE *ghai- to yawn, gape (cognates: Old Church Slavonic zijajo to gape,
Lithuanian &#382;ioju, Czech zivati to yawn, Greek khainein, Latin hiare to yawn, gape, Sanskrit
vijihite to gape, be ajar). Modern spelling is from 16c. Related: Yawned; yawning.


yawn (n.)

act of yawning, 1690s, from yawn (v.). Meaning boring thing is attested from 1889.


yawner (n.)

1680s, agent noun from yawn (v.). Meaning boring thing is 1942, American English colloquial (yawn
(n.) in this sense is attested from 1889).


yawp (v.)

c.1300, yolpen, probably echoic variant of yelpen (see yelp). Related: Yawped; yawping. The noun, in
reference to speech, is recorded from 1835, now used chiefly in conscious echo of Whitman (1855).


yaws (n.)

contagious skin disease, 1670s, from Carib yaya, the native name for it.


yay

this, as in yay big this big, 1950s, perhaps from yea yes in its sense of even, truly, verily. a
sort of demonstrative adverb used with adjectives of size, height, extent, etc., and often
accompanied by a hand gesture indicating size [DAS].


yclept

Old English gicliopad; from y- + past participle of cleopian, cpipian to speak, call; summon,
invoke; implore (see clepe).


ye (pron.)

Old English ge, nominative plural of 2nd person pronoun &thorn;u (see thou); cognate with Old
Frisian ji, Old Saxon gi, Middle Dutch ghi, Dutch gij. Cognate with Lithuanian jus, Sanskrit yuyam,
Avestan yuzem, Greek hymeis.    Altered, by influence of we, from an earlier form that was similar
to Gothic jus you (plural) (see you). The -r- in Old Norse er, German ihr probably is likewise from
influence of their respective 1st person plural pronouns (Old Norse ver, German wir).


ye (article)

old or quaintly archaic way of writing the, in which the -y- is a 16c. graphic alteration of
&thorn;, an Old English character (generally called thorn, originally a Germanic rune; see th-) that
represented the -th- sound (as at the beginning of thorn). The characters for -y- and -&thorn;- so
closely resembled each other in Old English and early Middle English handwriting that a dot had to
be added to the -y- to keep them distinct. In late 15c., early printers in English, whose types were
founded on the continent, did not have a &thorn; in their sets, so they substituted y as the letter
that looked most like it when setting type. But in such usages it was not meant to be pronounced
with any of the sounds associated with -y-, but still as -th-. Ye for the (and yt for that)
continued in manuscripts through 18c. Revived 19c. as a deliberate antiquarianism; the Ye Olde _____
construction was being mocked by 1896.


yea (adv.)

Old English gea (West Saxon), ge (Anglian) so, yes, from Proto-Germanic *ja-, *jai-, a word of
affirmation (cognates: German, Danish, Norwegian, Swedish ja), from PIE *yam-, from pronomial stem
*i- (see yon). As a noun, affirmation, affirmative vote, from early 13c.


yeah

American English, colloquial, by 1863, from drawling pronunciation of yes.


yean (v.)

Old English eanian to bring forth (young), especially in reference to sheep or goats, from Proto-
Germanic *aunon (cognate with Dutch oonen), from PIE *agwh-no- lamb (cognates: Greek amnos lamb,
Latin agnus, Old Church Slavonic agne, Old Irish van, Welsh oen). Yeanling young lamb, kid is
recorded from 1630s.


yeanling (n.)

lamb, kid, 1630s, from yean + -ling.


year (n.)

Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) year, from Proto-Germanic *jeram year (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr,
Gothic jer year), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- year, season (cognates: Avestan yare (nominative
singular) year; Greek hora year, season, any part of a year, also any part of a day, hour; Old
Church Slavonic jaru, Bohemian jaro spring; Latin hornus of this year; Old Persian du&#353;iyaram
famine, literally bad year). Probably originally that which makes [a complete cycle], and from
verbal root *ei- meaning to do, make.


year-long (adj.)

also yearlong, 1813, from year + -long.


year-round (adj.)

1917, from (all) the year round; see year (n.) + round (adj.). As an adverb from 1948.


yearbook (n.)

also year-book, 1580s, book of reports of cases in law-courts for that year, from year + book (n.).
Meaning book of events and statistics of the previous year is recorded from 1710. Sense of
graduating class album is attested from 1926, American English.


yearling (n.)

animal a year old or in its second year, mid-15c., from year + -ling. Year-old (n.) in this sense is
from 1530s.


yearly (adj.)

Old English gearlic yearly, of the year, annual; see year + -ly (1).


yearn (v.)

Old English giernan (West Saxon), geornan (Mercian), giorna (Northumbrian) to strive, be eager,
desire, seek for, beg, demand, from Proto-Germanic *gernjan (cognates: Gothic gairnjan to desire,
German begehren to desire; Old High German gern, Old Norse gjarn desirous, Old English georn eager,
desirous, German gern gladly, willingly), from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (see hortatory).
Related: Yearned; yearning.


yearning (n.)

Old English gierning, verbal noun from yearn (v.). Related: Yearningly.


yeast (n.)

Old English gist yeast, froth, from Proto-Germanic *jest- (cognates: Old Norse jastr, Swedish
j&#228;st, Middle High German gest, German Gischt foam, froth, Old High German jesan, German
g&auml;ren to ferment), from PIE root *yes- to boil, foam, froth (cognates: Sanskrit yasyati boils,
seethes, Greek zein to boil, Welsh ias seething, foaming).


yeasty (adj.)

1590s, from yeast + -y (2).


yegg (n.)

also yegg-man, 1901, a word popular in the first decade of the 20th century and meaning vaguely hobo
burglar; safe-breaker; criminal beggar.    The great majority [of the Chicago criminal population]
are what certain detectives call Yegg-men, which is a term, by the way, that the detectives would do
well to define. As far as I can discover it means tramp-thieves, but the average tramp seldom uses
the word. Hoboes that break safes in country post-offices come under the Yegg-men classification.
[McClure's Magazine, Feb. 1901]    Popularized by the Pinkerton agency detectives. The 1900
Proceedings of the 26th annual convention of the American Bankers' Association, whose members were
protected by the Pinkerton's National Detective Agency, reported a letter dated Nov. 23 or 24, 1899,
returning $540, taken earlier that year, to the Scandinavian-American Bank of St. Paul, Minn.,
noting that the thieves had been so hounded by detectives that they gave up the gains and advised
the bank to advertise that it was a member of the American Bankers Association, because the American
Bankers Association is too tough for poor 'grafters.' The letter supposedly was signed John Yegg,
but this was said to be a pseudonym and the report identified the man arrested later in the case as
William Barrett.


yell (v.)

Old English giellan (West Saxon), gellan (Mercian) to yell, sound, shout, class III strong verb
(past tense geal, past participle gollen), from Proto-Germanic *gel- (cognates: Old Norse gjalla to
resound, Middle Dutch ghellen, Dutch gillen, Old High German gellan, German gellen to yell),
extended form of root of Old English galan to sing (source of the -gale in nightingale); from PIE
*ghel- (1) to call, cry out, shout, sing (cognates: Greek kikhle thrush, khelidon the swallow).
Intransitive sense from early 13c. Related: Yelled; yelling.


yell (n.)

late 14c., originally in Scottish, from yell (v.).


yelling (n.)

mid-13c., verbal noun from yell (v.).


yellow (adj.)

Old English geolu, geolwe, yellow, from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish
gul yellow), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold
(see glass).    Occasionally in Middle English used of a color closer to blue-gray or gray, of frogs
or hazel eyes, and to translate Latin caeruleus, glauco. Also as a noun in Old English. Meaning
light-skinned (of blacks) first recorded 1808. Applied to Asiatics since 1787, though the first
recorded reference is to Turkish words for inhabitants of India. Yellow peril translates German die
gelbe gefahr. Sense of cowardly is 1856, of unknown origin; the color was traditionally associated
rather with jealousy and envy (17c.). Yellow-bellied cowardly is from 1924, probably a semi-rhyming
reduplication of yellow; earlier yellow-belly was a sailor's name for a half-caste (1867) and a
Texas term for Mexican soldiers (1842, based on the color of their uniforms). Yellow dog mongrel is
attested from c.1770; slang sense of contemptible person first recorded 1881. Yellow fever attested
from 1748, American English (jaundice is a symptom).


yellow (v.)

Old English geoluwian to become yellow, from the source of yellow (adj.). Transitive sense from
1590s. Related: Yellowed; yellowing.


yellow journalism

sensational chauvinism in the media, 1898, American English, from newspaper agitation for war with
Spain; originally publicity stunt use of colored ink (1895) in reference to the popular Yellow Kid
character (his clothes were yellow) in Richard Outcault's comic strip Shantytown in the New York
World.


yellow ribbon

The American folk custom of wearing or displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved
ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage crisis in Iran in 1979. It
does not have a connection to the American Civil War, beyond the use of the old British folk song
Round Her Neck She Wore A Yellow Ribbon in the John Wayne movie of the same name, with a Civil War
setting, released in 1949. The story of a ribbon tied to a tree as a signal to a convict returning
home that his loved ones have forgiven him is attested from 1959, but the ribbon in that case was
white.    The ribbon color seems to have changed to yellow first in a version retold by newspaper
columnist Pete Hamill in 1971. The story was dramatized in June 1972 on ABC-TV (James Earl Jones
played the ex-con). Later that year, Irwin Levine and L. Russell Brown copyrighted the song Tie a
Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree, which became a pop hit in early 1973 and sparked a lawsuit by
Hamill, later dropped.    In 1975, the wife of a Watergate conspirator put out yellow ribbons when
her husband was released from jail, and news coverage of that was noted and remembered by Penne
Laingen, whose husband was U.S. ambassador to Iran in 1979 and one of the Iran hostages taken in the
embassy on Nov. 4. Her yellow ribbon in his honor was written up in the Dec. 10, 1979, Washington
Post. When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the
yellow ribbon as their symbol. The ribbons revived in the 1991 Gulf War and again during the 2000s
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.


yellowcake (n.)

oxide of uranium, 1950, from yellow (adj.) + cake (n.).


yellowtail (n.)

type of fish, 1709, from yellow (adj.) + tail (n.).


yellowy (adj.)

1660s, from yellow (n.) + -y (2).


yelp (v.)

Old English gielpan (West Saxon), gelpan (Anglian) to boast, exult, from Proto-Germanic *gel-
(cognates: Old Saxon galpon, Old Norse gjalpa to yelp, Old Norse gjalp boasting, Old High German
gelph outcry), from PIE root *ghel- (1) to cry out (see yell (v.)). Meaning utter a quick, sharp,
bark or cry is 1550s, probably from the noun. Related: Yelped; yelping.


yelp (n.)

Old English gielp boasting, pride, arrogance, from source of yelp (v.). Meaning quick, sharp bark or
cry is attested from early 16c.


Yemen

southwestern region of Arabia, from Arabic Yemen, literally the country of the south, from yaman
right side (i.e., south side, if one is facing east). The right side regarded as auspicious, hence
Arabic yamana he was happy, literally he went to the right, and hence the Latin name for the region
in Roman times, Arabia Felix, lit, Happy Arabia. Related: Yemeni.


yen (n.1)

Japanese monetary unit, 1875, from Japanese yen, from Chinese yuan round, round object, circle,
dollar.


yen (n.2)

sharp desire, hunger, 1906, earlier yen-yen (1900), yin (1876) intense craving for opium, from
Chinese (Cantonese) yan craving, or from a Beijing dialect word for smoke. Reinforced in English by
influence of yearn.


yenta (n.)

gossip, busybody, 1923, from Yente Telebende, comic strip gossip in 1920s-30s writing of Yiddish
newspaper humorist B. Kovner (pen-name of Jacob Adler) in the Jewish Daily Forward. It was a common
Yiddish fem. proper name, altered from Yentl and said to be ultimately from Italian gentile kind,
gentle, earlier noble, high-born (see gentle).


yeoman (n.)

c.1300, attendant in a noble household, of unknown origin, perhaps a contraction of Old English
iunge man young man, or from an unrecorded Old English *geaman, equivalent of Old Frisian gaman
villager, from Old English -gea district, region, village, cognate with Old Frisian ga, ge, German
Gau, Gothic gawi, from Proto-Germanic *gaujan.    Sense of commoner who cultivates his land is
recorded from early 15c.; also the third order of fighting men (late 14c., below knights and
squires, above knaves), hence yeomen's service good, efficient service (c.1600). Meaning naval petty
officer in charge of supplies is first attested 1660s. Yeowoman first recorded 1852: Then I am yeo-
woman O the clumsy word! [Tennyson, The Foresters]


yeomanry (n.)

yeomen collectively, late 14c., from yeoman + -ry.


yep

by 1889, American English, variant of yes, altered for emphasis, or possibly influenced by nope.


yer

representing a dialectal or vulgar pronunciation of your, attested from 1814.


yes (adv.)

Old English gise, gese so be it!, probably from gea, ge so (see yea) + si be it!, third person
imperative of beon to be (see be). Originally stronger than simple yea. Used in Shakespeare mainly
as an answer to negative questions. As a noun from 1712. Yes-man is first recorded 1912, American
English.


yeshiva (n.)

Orthodox Jewish college or seminary, 1851, from Hebrew yesibah academy, literally a sitting, from
yashav to sit.


yessir

1836, representing a quick reply of yes, sir (in 19c. writing typically of restaurant waiters taking
orders). Extended form yessiree attested from 1846.


yester-

Old English geostran yesterday, from Proto-Germanic *gester- (cognates: Old High German gestaron,
German gestern yesterday, Old Norse g&aelig;r tomorrow, yesterday, Gothic gistradagis tomorrow),
originally the other day (reckoned from today, either backward or forward), from PIE root
*dhgh(y)es- yesterday (cognates: Sanskrit hyah, Avestan zyo, Persian di, Greek khthes, Latin heri,
Old Irish indhe, Welsh doe yesterday; Latin hesternus of yesterday).


yesterday (n., adv.)

Old English geostran d&aelig;g; see yester- + day.


yesternight (n., adv.)

Old English gystran niht; see yester- + night.


yesteryear (n.)

coined 1870 by Dante Gabriel Rossetti from yester- + year to translate French antan (from Vulgar
Latin *anteannum the year before) in a refrain by Fran&ccedil;ois Villon: Mais ou sont les neiges
d'antan? which Rossetti rendered But where are the snows of yesteryear?


yet (adv.)

Old English get, gieta till now, thus far, earlier, at last, also, an Anglo-Frisian word (cognates:
Old Frisian ieta, Middle High German ieuzo), of unknown origin; perhaps connected to PIE pronomial
stem *i- (see yon). The meaning in other Germanic languages is expressed by descendants of Proto-
Germanic *noh- (source of German noch), from PIE *nu-qe- and now. As a conjunction from c.1200.


yeti (n.)

1937, from Sherpa (Tibetan) yeh-teh small manlike animal. Compare abominable snowman.


yew (n.)

evergreen tree of temperate Europe and Asia, Old English iw, eow yew, from Proto-Germanic *iwo-
(cognates: Middle Dutch iwe, Dutch ijf, Old High German iwa, German Eibe, Old Norse yr), from PIE
*ei-wo- (cognates: Old Irish eo, Welsh ywen yew), perhaps a suffixed form of root *ei- (2) reddish,
motley, yellow.    OED says French if, Spanish iva, Medieval Latin ivus are from Germanic (and says
Dutch ijf is from French); others posit a Gaulish ivos as the source of these. Lithuanian jeva
likewise is said to be from Germanic. The tree symbolizes both death and immortality, being
poisonous as well as long-lived. Reference to its wood as well-suited to making bows dates from
c.1400.


Yggdrasil

great tree of the universe, 1770, from Old Norse ygdrasill, apparently from Yggr, a name of Odin +
drasill horse.


Yid (n.)

generally derogatory term for a Jew, 1874 (Hotten, apparently originally British English), from
Yiddish use, where it was complimentary (see Yiddish).


Yiddish (n.)

1875, from Yiddish yidish, from Middle High German j&uuml;disch Jewish (in phrase j&uuml;disch
deutsch Jewish-German), from jude Jew, from Old High German judo, from Latin Judaeus (see Jew). The
English word has been re-borrowed in German as jiddisch. As an adjective from 1886. Related:
Yiddishism.


yield (v.)

Old English gieldan (West Saxon), geldan (Anglian) to pay, pay for; reward, render; worship, serve,
sacrifice to (class III strong verb; past tense geald, past participle golden), from Proto-Germanic
*geldan pay (cognates: Old Saxon geldan to be worth, Old Norse gjaldo to repay, return, Middle Dutch
ghelden, Dutch gelden to cost, be worth, concern, Old High German geltan, German gelten to be worth,
Gothic fra-gildan to repay, requite).    From PIE *gheldh- to pay, a root found only in Balto-Slavic
and Germanic (and Old Church Slavonic &#382;ledo, Lithuanian geliuoti might be Germanic loan-words).
[T]he only generally surviving senses on the Continent are 'to be worth; to be valid, to concern,
apply to,' which are not represented at all in the English word [OED]; sense development in English
comes via use of this word to translate Latin reddere, French rendre. Sense of give in return for
labor or capital invested is from early 14c. Intransitive sense of give oneself up, submit,
surrender (to a foe) is from c.1300. Related to Middle Low German and Middle Dutch gelt, Dutch geld,
German Geld money. Related: Yielded; yielding.


yield (n.)

Old English gield payment, sum of money; service, offering, worship; from the source of yield (v.).
Extended sense of production (as of crops) is first attested mid-15c. Earliest English sense
survives in financial yield from investments.


yielding (adj.)

late 14c., generous in rewarding, present participle adjective from yield (v.). From 1660s as giving
way to physical force.


yikes

exclamation of alarm or surprise, by 1953; perhaps from yoicks, a call in fox-hunting, attested from
c.1770. Yike a fight is slang attested from 1940, of uncertain connection.


yin (n.)

feminine or negative principle in Chinese philosophy, 1670s, from Chinese (Mandarin) yin, said to
mean female, night, lunar, or shade, feminine, the moon. Compare yang. Yin-yang is from 1850.


yins (pron.)

you people, you-all, contracted from U.S. dialectal you-uns, for you-ones (see you, also see y'all);
first noted 1810 in Ohio. Also yinz; now considered a localism in Pittsburgh, Pa.


yip (v.)

1891, possibly from dialectal yip to cheep like a bird (early 19c.), from Middle English yippen
(mid-15c.), of imitative origin. As a noun from 1896.


yippee (interj.)

interjection of pleasure, exultation, etc., 1920; perhaps an extension and modification of hip
(interj.).


Yippie

1968, acronym from fictitious Youth International Party, modeled on hippie.    On December 31, 1967,
Abbie [Hoffman], Jerry [Rubin], Paul Krassner, Dick Gregory, and friends decided to pronounce
themselves the Yippies. (The name came first, then the acronym that would satisfy literal-minded
reporters: Youth International Party.) [Todd Gitlin, The Sixties, 1987, p.235]


YMCA (n.)

also Y.M.C.A., 1868, initialism (acronym) of Young Men's Christian Association.


yo

as a greeting, 1859, but the word is attested as a sailor's or huntsman's utterance since early 15c.
Modern popularity dates from World War II (when, it is said, it was a common response at roll calls)
and seems to have been most intense in Philadelphia.


yo-yo (n.)

1915, apparently from a language of the Philippines. Registered as a trademark in Vancouver, Canada,
in 1932, the year the first craze for them began (subsequent fads 1950s, 1970s, 1998). The toy
itself is much older and was earlier known as bandalore (1802), a word of obscure origin, but it was
from American contact in the Philippines that the first commercial development was established
[Century Dictionary]. Figurative sense of any up-and-down movement is first recorded 1932. Meaning
stupid person is recorded from 1970. The verb in the figurative sense is attested from 1967.


yob (n.)

a youth, 1859, British English, back-slang from boy. By 1930s with overtones of hooligan, lout.
Related: extended form yobbo.


yod (n.)

10th and smallest letter of the Hebrew alphabet (compare jot, iota).


yodel (v.)

sing by sudden changing to and from falsetto, 1827, from German jodeln, from dialectal German jo, an
exclamation of joy, of imitative origin. As a noun from 1849.


yoga (n.)

1820, from Hindi yoga, from Sanskrit yoga-s, literally union, yoking (with the Supreme Spirit), from
PIE root *yeug- to join (see jugular). Related: Yogic.


yogh (n.)

Middle English letter (&#540;), c.1300; see Y. The name probably is identical with yoke (Middle
English yogh) and so called because yoke began with a yogh.


yogi (n.)

one who practices yoga, 1610s, from Hindi yogi, from Sanskrit yoga- (see yoga). Related: Yogism.


yogurt (n.)

also yoghurt, 1620s, a mispronunciation of Turkish yogurt, in which the -g- is a soft sound, in many
dialects closer to an English w. The root yog means roughly to condense and is related to yogun
intense, yogush liquify (of water vapor), yogur knead.


yok (n.)

slang, gentile, non-Jew, pejorative, 1920, from Yiddish, where it is back slang, a reversed and
altered form of goy.


yoke (n.)

Old English geoc contrivance for fastening a pair of draft animals, earlier geoht pair of draft
animals (especially oxen), from Proto-Germanic *yukam (cognates: Old Saxon juk, Old Norse ok, Danish
aag, Middle Dutch joc, Dutch juk, Old High German joh, German joch, Gothic juk yoke), from PIE root
*yeug- to join (see jugular). Figurative sense of heavy burden, oppression, servitude was in Old
English.


yoke (v.)

Old English geocian to yoke, join together, from yoke (n.). Related: Yoked; yoking.


yokel (n.)

1812, perhaps from dialectal German Jokel, disparaging name for a farmer, originally diminutive of
Jakob. Or perhaps from English yokel, dialectal name for woodpecker.


yolk (n.)

Old English geolca, geoloca yolk, literally the yellow part, from geolu yellow (see yellow (adj.)).
Formerly also spelled yelk.


Yom Kippur

Jewish holiday, 1854, from Mishnaic Hebrew yom kippur (in Biblical Hebrew, yom kippurim), literally
day of atonement, from yom day + kippur atonement, expiation.


yon (adj., pron.)

Old English geon that (over there), from Proto-Germanic *jaino- (cognates: Old Frisian jen, Old
Norse enn, Old High German ener, Middle Dutch ghens, German jener, Gothic jains that, you), from PIE
pronomial stem *i- (cognates: Sanskrit ena-, third person pronoun, anena that; Latin idem the same,
id it, that one; Old Church Slavonic onu he; Lithuanian ans he). As an adverb from late 15c., a
shortening of yonder.


yond (adv., prep.)

Old English geond beyond, yonder, related to geon (see yon).


yonder (adv.)

within sight but not near, c.1300, from Old English geond throughout, up to, as far as (see yond) +
comparative suffix -er (2). Cognate with Middle Low German ginder, Middle Dutch gender, Dutch
ginder, Gothic jaindre. Now replaced except in poetic usage by ungrammatical that.


yoni (n.)

1799, from Sanskrit, female sexual principle as an object of veneration, literally vulva, womb.


yoo-hoo (interj.)

exclamation to call attention, by 1913.


yore (adv.)

Old English geara of yore, formerly, in former times, literally of years, originally adverbial
genitive plural of gear (see year), and used without of. As a noun from mid-14c.


York

city in northern England, Old English Eoforwic, earlier Eborakon (c.150), an ancient Celtic name,
probably meaning Yew-Tree Estate, but Eburos may also be a personal name. Related: Yorkist; Yorkish;
Yorker. Yorkshire pudding is recorded from 1747; Yorkshire terrier first attested 1872; short form
Yorkie is from 1950.


Yoruba

west Nigerian people, also the name of their language.


Yosemite

from Southern Sierra Miwok /yohhe'meti/ they are killers. [E]vidently a name given to the Indians of
the valley by those outside it. [Bright]


you (pron.)

Old English eow, dative and accusative plural of &thorn;u (see thou), objective case of ge, ye (see
ye), from Proto-Germanic *juz-, *iwwiz (cognates: Old Norse yor, Old Saxon iu, Old Frisian iuwe,
Middle Dutch, Dutch u, Old High German iu, iuwih, German euch), from PIE *yu, second person (plural)
pronoun.    Pronunciation of you and the nominative form ye gradually merged from 14c.; the
distinction between them passed out of general usage by 1600. Widespread use of French in England
after 12c. gave English you the same association as French vous, and it began to drive out singular
nominative thou, originally as a sign of respect (similar to the royal we) when addressing
superiors, then equals and strangers, and ultimately (by c.1575) becoming the general form of
address. Through 13c. English also retained a dual pronoun ink you two; your two selves; each other.


young (n.)

young animals collectively, offspring, late 15c., from young (adj.).


young (adj.)

Old English geong youthful, young; recent, new, fresh, from Proto-Germanic *juwunga- (cognates: Old
Saxon and Old Frisian jung, Old Norse ungr, Middle Dutch jonc, Dutch jong, Old High German and
German jung, Gothic juggs), from PIE *yuwn-ko-, suffixed form of root *yeu- vital force, youthful
vigor (cognates: Sanskrit yuva young, Latin juvenis young, Lithuanian jaunas, Old Church Slavonic
junu, Russian junyj young, Old Irish oac, Welsh ieuanc young).    From c.1830-1850, Young France,
Young Italy, etc., were loosely applied to republican agitators in various monarchies; also,
especially in Young England, Young America, used generally for typical young person of the nation.
For Young Turk, see Turk.


youngster (n.)

1580s, from young + -ster. Earlier was youngling, from Old English geongling.


younker

c.1500, young nobleman, from Middle Dutch jonckher (Dutch jonker), from jonc young (see young
(adj.)) + here lord, master (see Herr). Compare junker.


your

Old English eower, possessive pronomial adjective, genitive of ge ye (see ye), from Proto-Germanic
base of you. Cognate with Old Saxon iuwar, Old Frisian iuwer, Old Norse y&eth;varr, Old High German
iuwer, German euer, Gothic izwar your. Used in titles of honor by mid-14c.


yourn (pron.)

dialectal possessive pronoun from your, attested from late 14c. See her.


yours (pron.)

absolutive form of your, c.1300, on model of his, ours, etc. Yours truly myself is from 1833, from
the common subscription of letters.    It is difficult to say what will succeed, and still more to
pronounce what will not. I am at this moment in that uncertainty (on our own score,) and it is no
small proof of the author's powers to be able to charm and fix a mind's attention on similar
subjects and climates in such a predicament. That he may have the same effect upon all his readers
is very sincerely the wish, and hardly the doubt, of yours truly,  B.  [Lord Byron to John Murray,
Dec. 4, 1813]


yourself

by early 14c., from your + self. Plural yourselves first recorded 1520s.


youse

dialectal inflection of you, 1876, not always used in plural senses.


youth (n.)

Old English geogu&eth; youth; young people, junior warriors; young of cattle, related to geong
young, from Proto-Germanic *jugunthi- (cognates: Old Saxon juguth, Old Frisian jogethe, Middle Dutch
joghet, Dutch jeugd, Old High German jugund, German Jugend, Gothic junda youth), from suffixed form
of PIE root *yeu- vital force, youthful vigor (see young (adj.)) + Proto-Germanic abstract noun
suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    According to OED, the Proto-Germanic form apparently was altered
from *juwunthiz by influence of its contrast, *dugunthiz ability (source of Old English dugu&eth;).
In Middle English, the medial -g- became a yogh, which then disappeared.  They said that age was
truth, and that the youngMarred with wild hopes the peace of slavery[Shelley]


youthful (adj.)

1560s, from youth + -ful. Old English had geogu&eth;lic. Other words formerly used in the same sense
were youthlike, youthly, youthsome, youthy. Related: Youthfulness.


yow

exclamation, with various meanings, mid-15c.


yowl (v.)

c.1200, yuhelen, probably of imitative origin. Related: Yowled; yowling. The noun is recorded from
mid-15c.


yowza

colloquial form of yes, sir, 1934, popularized by U.S. bandleader and radio personality Ben The Old
Maestro Bernie (1891-1943).


ytterbium (n.)

metallic rare-earth element, 1879, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist Carl Gustaf Mosander
(1797-1858) from Ytterby, name of a town in Sweden where mineral containing it was found.


yttrium

metallic rare-earth element, 1866, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist Carl Gustaf Mosander
(1797-1858) from Ytterby, name of a town in Sweden where mineral containing it was found.


yuan (n.)

Chinese unit of currency introduced 1914, from Chinese yuan round, round object, circle.


Yucatan

said to be from a local word meaning massacre. Related: Yucatecan.


yucca (n.)

Central and South American name for the cassava plant, 1550s, from Spanish yuca, juca (late 15c.),
probably from Taino, native language of Haiti.


yuck (1)

exclamation of disgust, 1966, origin perhaps echoic (compare Newfoundland slang yuck to vomit, 1963;
U.S. slang yuck despised person, 1943; provincial English yuck the itch, mange, scabies). Variant
yech is by 1969.


yuck (2)

laugh, 1938, yock, probably imitative.


yucky (adj.)

1970, from yuck (1) + -y (2). Related: Yuckiness.


Yugoslav (n.)

1853, from Slav + Serbo-Croatian jugo- south, comb. form of jug south, south wind, noon, from Old
Church Slavonic jugu south, south wind, noon.


Yugoslavia

1929 (earlier the country was Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes); from Yugoslav + -ia. The
name vanished from the map in 2003.


yuk (n.)

laughter, something evoking laughs, 1964, imitative; see yuck (2).


Yukon

territory of northwestern Canada, named for the river, from Athabaskan, perhaps Koyukon yookkene or
Lower Tanana yookuna, said to mean big river.


yule (n.)

Old English geol, geola Christmas Day, Christmastide, from Old Norse jol (plural), a heathen feast,
later taken over by Christianity, of unknown origin.    The Old English (Anglian) cognate giuli was
the Anglo-Saxons' name for a two-month midwinter season corresponding to Roman December and January,
a time of important feasts but not itself a festival. After conversion to Christianity it narrowed
to mean the 12-day feast of the Nativity (which began Dec. 25), but was replaced by Christmas by
11c., except in the northeast (areas of Danish settlement), where it remained the usual word.
Revived 19c. by writers to mean the Christmas of 'Merrie England.'  First direct reference to the
Yule log is 17c. Old Norse jol seems to have been borrowed in Old French as jolif, hence Modern
French joli pretty, nice, originally festive (see jolly).


yuletide (n.)

late 15c., from yule + tide.


yum (interj.)

exclamation of pleasure, attested from 1878.


Yuma

native people of Arizona, also their language, of the Yuman family, the name probably is from
O'odham (Piman) yu'mi and represents the name the Piman peoples applied to the Yuma people.


yummy

delicious, 1899, from baby talk. Yum-yum as an exclamation of pleasure is recorded from 1878.


yup

1906, variant of yes.


yuppie (n.)

1982, acronym from young urban professional, ousting competition from yumpie (1984), from young
upward-mobile professional, and yap (1984), from young aspiring professional. The word was felt as
an insult by 1985.


yurt (n.)

house or hut of the natives of north and central Asia, 1784, ultimately from Russian yurta, from a
Turkic language and originally meaning home, dwelling.


YWCA (n.)

also Y.W.C.A., 1874, initialism (acronym) of Young Women's Christian Association.


